1. श्रीमाता
We address our mother as mātā. Mātā means mother. The prefix Śrī is important here. Śrī (ि ) represents the highest form of motherhood. The human mothers can take care of their children with love and affection. But they cannot remove the miseries and sufferings of their loved ones, which they are destined to undergo. Since Lalitāmbikā is much more than a human mother is, She has the capacity to remove sorrows and miseries of Her children. Children mean all the living beings in this universe, as She is the mother of the entire universe that includes the galaxy. She is addressed as mātā as She is the Creator, sustainer and also the dissolver. The universe was created out of Her. The universe acts as per Her instructions. When the dissolution takes place, the universe merges back into Her. The cycle of saṃsāra (the world which has phenomenal existence and also meaning transmigration) repeats itself by birth, sustenance and death. Saṃsāra is called as an ocean. It is difficult to swim against the current of saṃsāra. The current of saṃsāra is produced by sense organs. These sense organs in turn influence the mind that causes desires and attachments. Only Śrī Mātā is capable of helping us to cross the hurdles of saṃsāra and reach the destination (realization of Brahman). This is possible only by worshipping Her. Śrī Mātā is also said to mean the mother of the Goddesses Śrī Lakṣmī (goddess of wealth), Sarasvatī (goddess of knowledge) and Rudrānī (the goddess of dissolution) the wife of Rudra. Rudra is different from Śiva. Therefore Śrī Mātā means the mother of these three goddesses. Durvāsā is a great saint. He composed Śrī Śaktimahimnaḥ Stotram containing sixty one verses in Her praise. He surrenders to Śrī Mātā by saying “Oh! Mātā! the Supreme compassionate! I had born to a number of mothers. In future also, I may be born to a number of mothers. My mothers are countless, as I had different mothers for my different births. I am so scared to be born again and to undergo the associated sufferings. Oh! Mātā! I am surrendering to you. Please give me relief from my future births.” When Śrī is added as a prefix to any word, it shows the greatness. There are five such words with Śrī prefixed in the worship of the Devi. These five together are called Śrī Panchagam. They are Śrī Puram (the place where She dwells), Śrī Cakra, the palace where She lives with Her body guards, Śrī Vidyā, the ritual worship, Śrī Sūktam, verses in praise of Her and Śrī Guru, the spiritual teacher who initiates his disciple into Śaktī worship. The main element of Śaktī worship is tantra śāstra. Śrī also means Veda-s. Veda-s originated from the Brahman. Lalitāmbigai is the Brahman as repeatedly stressed in this Sahasranāma. Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (VI.18) says, “He first created Brahma and then presented the Veda-s to Him. I, a seeker of liberation, take refuge in that luminous Lord who reveals the knowledge of the Self in the mind.” It is also said that this nāma means the Pañcadaśī mantra. It is pertinent to note that this Sahasranāma begins by addressing Lalitāmbikā as the mother of all, which emphasizes Her compassion for the universe and all its beings. Since She is addressed as Śrī Mātā, this nāma refers to creation, the first act of the Brahman.

2. श्रीमहाराज्ञी
Again this nāma also begins with Śrī. Mahārājñī means the queen of queens, the empress. Most of the nāma-s of this Sahasranāma contain powerful bījākśara-s. It is difficult to segregate these bīja-s from the nāma. Bīja-s or bījākśara-s are either single Sanskrit alphabet or the combination of alphabets making a compound alphabet. Each of these bīja-s is considered as highly secretive in nature, very powerful and can bestow powers on a person who regularly chants these bīja-s duly understanding its meaning. Specific rules are prescribed for pronunciation. Ṣodaśī mantra is considered as the supreme of all the mantra-s in the worship of Devi. Ṣodaśī means sixteen kalā-s or letters. Kalā* means the sixteen days of waxing or waning moon i.e. full moon to new moon or new moon to full moon. There is another mantra called Pañcadaśī consisting of fifteen letters. If one more bīja is added to fifteen lettered Pañcadaśī, it is called Ṣodaśī. Saundarya Laharī (verse 1) says, “Oh! Mother, the letters of the three groups constitute Your mantra.” (A detailed study of Pañcadaśī mantra is provided in the introduction chapter and in nāma-s 85 to 89) If one chants the Ṣodaśī mantra for the prescribed number of times, (900,000 times) he or she will have no more births. This sixteenth bīja of Ṣodaśī is hidden in this nāma. Normally, this should be learnt only from a Guru. The sixteenth bīja consists of the first four letters of this nāma Ś + r + ī + ṁ = Śrīm, (ि ीं) the Lakṣmī bīja, the bīja of sustenance. The first nāma talks about Her creative power and the second nāma talks about Her power of sustenance. As a mother She creates and as the supreme queen, She sustains the universe. {*Further reading on kalā: Kalā is the dynamism peculiar to Nature, also known as prakṛti. This does not mean the prakṛti that exists at the level of Śiva , but Śiva , when envisaged in union with the energy, is eminently endowed with the creative dynamism that Nature will exhibit at Her own stage of differentiation. Śiva is always two fold, with attributes and without attributes. Śiva without attributes is considered as the Supreme amongst the creation and is distinct from prakṛti. When Śiva is endowed with attributes, it means that He is endowed with kalā-s. Sixteen kalā-s mean the sixteen vowels, which are full (owing to their ambrosial nature) and where the knowable predominates. Being Śrī Mātā, the Divine Mother, whose name is constituted by these kalā-s (letters). Impulsion is the culmination of the expansion of kalā. Kalā also means a small part of anything, any single part or portion of a whole, especially a sixteenth part, a digit, or onesixteenth of the moon's diameter, a symbolical expression of the number sixteen. }

3. श्रीमत्सिंहासनेश्वरी
Lalitāmbikā as the queen of queens is sitting on a lion. Lion is associated with ferociousness and is known as the king of animals. The supreme queen is using lion as her vehicle. This description of Lalitāmbikā talks about Her role as the supreme dissolver. Simha in Sanskrit means lion. The root for the word siṃha is derived from the word himsa. Himsa in Sanskrit means destruction. Śrīmat + siṃha + āsanam + Iśvarī. Śrīmat means the supreme respect given to Her in Her capacity as the destroyer of the universe, simha means lion, āsanam means seat (here it means throne), Iśvarī means the ruler. The first three nāma-s of this Sahasranāma begin with the letter Śrī. Śrī means prosperity, wealth, etc. This bīja Śrī represents the goddess Lakṣmī, the goddess of wealth. She is the wife of Śrī Mahā Viṣṇu. This nāma also conveys that the worshipper of Lalitai will attain all material prosperity. According to Jñānārnava, one of the ancient texts, there are eight mantra-s called simhāsana mantra-s to be performed on the four sides of the bindu in the Śrī Cakra and one in the bindu itself. Twenty four goddesses are worshiped in this simhāsana mantra. This nāma also means that Lalitāmbikā is the Īśvarī for these twenty four goddesses. The first three nāma-s refer to the Supreme nature of Lalitāmbikā, the creator, the sustainer and the dissolver. As far as Her act of dissolution is concerned, She destroys those who commit sinful acts. But She ensures that Her true devotees merge with Her. This merger is called laya or absorption.

4. चिदग्निकुण्डसम्भूता
Cit + agni + kuṇḍa + saṃbhūta. Cit means the nirguṇa Brahman or the Brahman without attributes (the foundational consciousness). Agni kuṇḍa means a fire altar, in which fire sacrifices are done by offering oblations. Saṃbhūtā means born. Agni kuṇḍa or the fire altar means the dispeller of darkness. Darkness means lack of knowledge or ignorance which is called a-vidyā (vidyā means knowledge). This should not be interpreted as the one who was born out of the fire. She is the supreme consciousness who dispels ignorance. She dispels ignorance through Her form of pure consciousness, who illuminates within, dispelling the darkness of māyā. The same explanation is given by Kṛṣṇa in Bhagavad Gīta (IV.37), “Like a fire turning the fire logs into ashes, the fire of knowledge burns to ashes all the karma-s (sarva karmani).” Complete knowledge of the pure Brahman residing within, destroys all our karma-s whether good or bad. One should have no balance in karmic account to avoid further births.

5. देवकार्यसमुद्यता
She has manifested Herself to help deva-s (gods and goddesses). What is the help She can do for devās? It goes back to a story where deva-s were engaged in a war with the demons who are called as asura-s. She helps deva-s to win the battle with the demons. Deva-s do not perform evil deeds, therefore She always helps devas. When She is said to be a part of the Brahman, why She should manifest afresh to destroy the demons? When She is said to be the part of the Brahman, it refers to Her prakāśa form. Prakāśa (the principle Self-revelation; consciousness; the principle by which ever other thing is known.) form represents Śiva and vimarśa (Selfconsciousness as opposed to Self-revelation of Śiva ; the awareness of Śiva , full of knowledge and actions that bring about the world process) form represents Śaktī. Since She is a part of the Supreme Śiva who Has created Her as His vimarśa form, the prakāśa form of Lalitāmbikā is subtly highlighted here without explicitly saying so. This nāma discusses Her prakāśa form. There is an important saying in Yogavasiśtā, “I have two forms, ordinary and supreme. The ordinary form of mine is with hands and legs. This form of mine is worshiped by ignorant men. The other one is my supreme form, the formless form without a beginning and an end. This form of mine has no qualities or attributes and is called the Brahman, Ātman, Paramātman, etc.” In this nāma demons or asura-s means avidyā or ignorance. Deva-s means knowledge or vidyā. She helps those who seek knowledge about the Brahman.

6. उद्यद्भानुसहस्राभा
Udyad – rising; bhānu-sun; sahasra – thousand or countless; abhā - light. Lalitāmbikā appears as bright as thousand suns rising at the same time. The colour of the rising sun is red. The complexion of Lalitāmbikā is red as described in the dhyāna śloka of this Sahasranāma (sakuṅkuma-vilepanām). Almost all the tantra śastras and ancient scriptures talk about Her complexion as red. In the previous nāma Her prakāśa form was discussed and in this nāma Her vimarśa form is being described. She has three forms – the prakāśa form or the subtle form, the vimarśa form or the physical form and Her parā form or the supreme form. The prakāśa form of Her is said to be made of various mantra-s, the supreme one being mahā ṣodaśī mantra. Her vimarśa form is Her physical form. She is worshiped in thousands of forms. Her supreme form is realised through mental worship. These forms and the associated red colour are for easier contemplation. From the next nāma onwards, Her physical form is being described. The red colour also indicates care. She looks after Her devotees with great care and affection like a mother. Kṛṣṇa says (Bhagavad Gīta II.12) “If hundreds of thousands of suns were to rise at once into the sky, their radiance might resemble the effulgence of the Supreme Person in that universal form.”

7. चतुर्बाहुसमन्विता
The physical appearance of Lalitāmbikā begins here. She has four arms. These four arms represent Her ministers, through whom She administers. These Devi-s who assist Her are described in the next four nāma-s.

8. रागस्वरूपपाशाढ्या
Rāga means desire or a wish. Pāśa is a type of rope used to pull an object. She pulls all the desires of Her devotees using this rope. There are three śakti-s (śakti in this context means power) – iccā, jñāna and kriya. This nāma talks about iccā śakti or the desire. She never allows Her devotees to sink with desires. This arm is Her left lower arm and is represented by Aśvārūdā Devi.

9. क्रोधाकाराङ्कुशोज्ज्वला
She holds an elephant hook in her right upper arm. Krodha means hatred and akāra means knowledge. This nāma talks about subtle body. Knowledge is always subtle. She uses this elephant hook to destroy the hatred if developed in Her devotees and gives them knowledge. A bīja of Kālī, kroṁ (क्रों) is hidden in this nāma. Kālī is the destroyer of all evils. This right lower arm is represented by Sampathkarī Devi.

10. मनोरूपेक्षुकोदण्डा
Mind involves both saṃkalpa and vikalpa. Saṃkalpa means resolve, process of thought. Vikalpa means difference of perception. Both are opposite to each other. Mind is also subtle like knowledge. Mind is reflected through the five sensory organs. It has both saṃkalpa and vikalpa quality as it acts through the impressions received from sense organs that get fine tuned in the form of thought and finally explodes in the form of actions. Ikṣu means sugar cane and kodaṇḍa means a bow. She is holding in Her left upper arm a bow of sugar cane. Why sugarcane bow? If sugarcane is crushed, sweet and tasty juice is obtained from which sugar is manufactured. It means if one crushes his mind (controlling the mind), he gets the sweet reality of the Brahman. This arm is represented by Mantrinī also known Śyāmala Devi.

11. पञ्चतन्मात्रसायका
Pañca means five and tanmātra-s are sound, touch, sight, taste and smell, the subtle modifications of the five basic elements ākāś, air, fire, water and earth. The earlier nāma spoke about the bow and this nāma talks about Her arrows. She has five arrows. These five arrows are made of flowers. The five flower arrows represent five subtle elements. These five flowers or arrows are described differently in various tantra śāstra-s. These five flowers are lotus flower, raktakairava flower, kalhara flower, indivara flower and flowers of mango tree. These five flowers represent excitement, madness, confusion, stimulation and destruction. The arrows are used in wars targeting the enemies. Lalitāmbikā targets Her devotees with these arrows to destroy the illusion or māyā as the five subtle elements are associated with māyā. This is Her right upper hand. Vārāhī Devi is represented by this hand. Nāma-s 8,9,10 and 11 have secret bījākśara-s. For example, eighth nāma has hrīṃ bīja which is known as māyā bīja. The eighth nāma begins with rāgasva which is formed of ra + aga + sva. Aga means Śiva. The bīja for Śiva is hāṁ (हाीं). This is to be taken as ha. The next is ra (र) and this is to be taken as it is. Sva means the letter īṁ (ईं) with a bindu (dot) on the top. The bīja hrīṁ (ह्रीं) is thus formed by ha + ra + īṁ and pronounced as hrīṁ. Like this in the other three nāma-s such bījākaśara-s (da, ra, ka, la, ya, sa, va, ā, ī, ū) are hidden. That is why Lalitā Sahasranāma is considered on par with Veda-s. Most importantly, this Sahasranāma should not be recited with rāga or svara (musical notes).

12. निजारुणप्रभापूरमज्जद्ब्रह्माण्डमण्डला
Her red-rose like complexion radiates the universe with red colour. From this nāma onwards, the gross description of Lalitāmbikā begins. When physical description of a God is made, it is from foot to head and for Goddesses it is from head to foot. For Lalitāmbikā, the description begins from Her head. For Śiva the descriptions are both from His head as well as His feet as He represents both Śiva and Śaktī (ardhanārīśvara form, Śiva and Śaktī combined in a single form, half male and half female, conjoined vertically). In Pañcadaśī mantra there are three parts or kūṭa-s (divisions). Out of the three kūṭa-s, Vāgbhava kūṭa is meditated upon Her head, which is in line with the tradition of describing Her from head to foot.

13. चम्पकाशोकपुन्नागसौगन्धिकलसत्कचा
Campaka, aśoka, punnāga, saugandhika are the four types of fragrant flowers that adorn Her hair. But Her hair does not get fragrance because of these flowers, whereas these flowers get their fragrance from Her hair. Her hair is always sweet smelling. Saundarya Laharī (verse 43), says.”Your dense, greasy and soft braid of hair, resembling a group of blue lotuses in bloom, dispel our ignorance. I think the flowers of the trees in the garden of the foe of Vala abide therein to attain their innate fragrance.” Wetness indicates Her compassion and softness indicates Her motherhood. Durvāsa ṛṣi (Sage Durvās) in his ‘Śaktī Mahimna’ meditates on Her sweet smelling hair in his heart cakra. The idea behind these description is when Her hair can drive away ignorance (knowledge is considered as supreme in realising the Brahman), what Her total form can do for Her devotees. These four sweet smelling flowers mean the four deceptive components of antaḥkaraṇa viz. mind, intellect, consciousness and ego. Kuruvinda-maṇiśreṇī-kanat-koṭīra-maṇḍitā कगरुववन्द्द-मणणिेण -

14. कुरुविन्दमणिश्रेणीकनत्कोटीरमण्डिता
Kuruvinda is a rare type of ruby, which is red in colour. This particular type of ruby is said to enhance love, wealth and devotion for Viṣṇu (Viṣṇu is Her brother). These rubies adorn Her crown. When She is meditated upon with this red crown, spirituality and prosperity will increase. Saundarya Laharī (verse 42) says, “Why will not he, who extols your golden crown, closely stud with the twelve Suns (twelve āditya-s - dvādasa āditya-s, each āditya representing one solar month ) transformed into gems, form the idea that the digit of the (crescent) Moon, variegated by enveloping lustre of the inlaid gems, is but the bow of Indra (rainbow)?” Śrī Śaktī Mahimnaḥ (verse 42) also describes Her crown.

15. अष्टमीचन्द्रविभ्राजदलिकस्थलशोभिता
Her forehead appears like the moon on the eighth day. Eighth day from the full moon or new moon is called asḥṭamī. The moon appears beautiful with even curves on both sides on eighth lunar day.

16. मुखचन्द्रकलङ्काभमृगनाभिविशेषका
She is wearing a kastūri (kastūrikā a fragrant paste) tilaka (a mark on the forehead made with coloured earths, sandal-wood, or unguents, either as ornament or as a sectarian distinction) and this is compared to the spot that we see in the moon. In Śrī Śaktī Mahimnaḥ (verse 39), Her face is meditated upon.

17. वदनस्मरमाङ्गल्यगृहतोरणचिल्लिका
Her face is compared to the palace of lord Manmatha (the god of love - cupid) and Her eyebrows are compared to the festoons adorning his house. Cillikā means eyebrows. It is said that Manmatha constructed an auspicious palace, copying the face of Lalitāmbikā. Vaktra-lakṣmī-parīvāha-calan-mīnābha-locanā वकि-लक्ष्म -

18. वक्त्रलक्ष्मीपरीवाहचलन्मीनाभलोचना
Her eyes appear like fishes moving in a pond. Her face is compared to a pond and Her eyes to fishes. Fishes move very quickly. She also moves Her eyes quickly as She has to shower Her grace on the entire universe. The fish eggs become fertile by mere glance of mother fish. In the same manner She by Her mere glance nourishes the universe. Because of the beauty of Her eyes She is also known as Mīnākṣī, Mīnalocanī, etc.

19. नवचम्पकपुष्पाभनासादण्डविराजिता
Her nose resembles like a newly blossomed champaka flower.

20. ताराकान्तितिरस्कारिनासाभरणभासुरा
She is wearing a nose stud that outshines the stars. Her nose stud is made up of rubies and pearls. Tārā means stars Tārā also means two goddesses Maṅgalā and Śuklā. Śuklā has later come to be known as Śukrā. Possibly these Maṅgalā and Śukrā could mean the two planets Mars and Venus. Each planet governs certain precious stones. Planet Mars rules ruby that is red in colour and Venus rules diamond (Mani Mālā II.79). It can also be said that these two planets adorn Her nose. This also indicates that worshipping Her wards off the evil effects of planets.

21. कदम्बमञ्जरीकॢप्तकर्णपूरमनोहरा
She is wearing the petals of kadhamba flowers in Her ears or flowers kept in Her hair flow down to Her ears. These flowers are grown outside Her Cintāmani graha (The palace where She lives). These flowers have divine fragrance, which is derived from Her ear lobes.

22. ताटङ्कयुगलीभूततपनोडुपमण्डला
She is wearing sun and moon as Her ear rings. This means She controls all the activities of the universe, as sun and moon are responsible for sustaining life. It is also said that sun and moon represent her eyes, earrings and bosoms. The bīja klīṁ (कलरीं) is symbolises Her two bosoms, which represent the two semi circles in the klīṁ bīja. The klīṁ bīja is also known as kāma bīja. Further details are to be learnt from a Guru. Most of the nāma-s of this Sahasranāma subtly convey various bīja-s and hence this Sahasranām is considered as very powerful. Saundarya Laharī (verse 28) says, “Brahma, Indra and other celestials perish even though they have drunk nectar which confers immunity from frightful grey hairs (of old age) and death. If the longevity of Śiva despite His swallowing the terrific poison is not limited by time, it is because of the greatness of your ear ornaments.” Padmarāga-śilādharśa-paribhāvi-kapolabhūḥ पद्मराग-लशलाधशु-

23. पद्मरागशिलादर्शपरिभाविकपोलभूः
Her cheeks are shining, soft and reflecting. Padmarāga is a type of ruby, red in colour. Ruby is of four types: vipra, kuruvinda, saugandhika and mansa-khanda, out of which vipra is superior. Wearing afflicted rubies cause irreparable damages in one’s life. Her cheeks are reflecting red colour as Her complexion itself is red. The other ornaments that have been described above are also red in colour. The sun and the moon in Her ear lobes make Her cheeks shining red. Everything associated with Her is red. As discussed earlier, red indicates compassion. Saundarya Laharī (verse 59) says, “Your face is cupid’s four wheeled chariot, having the pair of your ear ornaments reflected in the expanse of your cheeks. Cupid, the mighty warrior sitting on it plots revengefully against the Lord Śiva, resting on the chariot of the Earth having the Sun and Moon for its wheels.” Navavidruma-bimbaśrī-nyakkāri-radanacchadā नवववरमग -

24. नवविद्रुमबिम्बश्रीन्यक्कारिरदनच्छदा
Her lips outshine fresh coral and the bimba fruit (momordica monadelpha). Bimba fruit is normally compared to beautiful lips. Both are red in colour.

25. शुद्धविद्याङ्कुराकारद्विजपङ्क्तिद्वयोज्ज्वला
Her teeth appear like Śuddha-vidyā, which means Śrī Vidyā. Śrī Vidyā is considered as the most secret and powerful ritual worship of Lalitāmbikā. This involves a lot of rituals and each ritual has its own meaning and interpretation. Śuddha means pure, vidyā means knowledge and Śuddha-vidyā means pure knowledge. This is considered pure because this upāsana mārg or the cult of Śrī Vidyā worship emphasizes the non-duality, ‘I am That’ concept. The ṣodaśī mantra is considered as the seed for Śrī Vidyā. It has sixteen bīja-s. When a seed grows into a sprout, it has two leaves. Therefore 16 x 2 gives 32, the number of teeth in human beings. Even though teeth have two rows placed in upper and lower jaws, the jaws are attached to each other internally. In the same way soul (jīva) and (Brahman) God are considered as different out of ignorance when both remain the same. Śrī Vidyā worship is to be done in seclusion, understanding the significance and meanings of the procedures. Then only the worship yields results. In the mantra initiation procedures of Devi, there are thirty two types of dīkśa (types of initiation). Yet another interpretation is also possible. This Sahasranāma starts only with 32 letters out of the 51 alphabets in Sanskrit. This 32 represents Her teeth. This could also mean that the initiation into Śrī Vidyā cult is to be done verbally by Guru to his disciple. {Further reading on Śuddha-vidyā: This is the fifteenth tattva, counting from Śiva. In this tattva, the consciousness of both “I” and “This” is equally predominant. Though the germinal universe is seen differently, yet identity runs through it as a thread. There is identity in diversity at this stage. Kriya is predominant tattva here. The consciousness of this state is ‘I am, I and also this’. Vidyā tattva consists of Śuddha-vidyā, sahaja vidyā and kañcuka (limited knowledge). Vidyātattva consists of śuddhavidyā, sahajavidyā and vidyākañcuka. Śuddhavidyā here is the same as sadvidyā (fifth tattva), while sahajavidyā is natural knowledge (not a tattva). Natural knowledge implies the emergence of His Freedom. As sahajavidyā (natural knowledge) is also known as śuddhavidyā (pure knowledge). }

26. कर्पूरवीटिकामोदसमाकर्षिदिगन्तरा
Karpūravītikā is a combination of fragrant ingredients, used to chew along with the betel leaves. The ingredients used are – saffron, cardamom, clove, camphor, kastūri, nutmeg and mace or myristica fragrans or jātipattrī (arillus of the nut also known as myristica officinalis). The ingredients are finely powdered and mixed with powdered sugar candy. This Karpūravītikā powder when used with betel leaves for chewing gives immense fragrance and delicious taste). When She chews this, it provides fragrance to the entire universe. Please refer nāma 559 also. In Lalitā Triśatī (containing 300 nāma-s based on Pañcadaśī mantra) nāma 14 also coveys the same meaning. Possibly this could mean that She attracts ignorant men by this fragrance. Knowledgeable men can reach Her by devotion whereas ignorant men require inducement to obtain Her grace. This inducement is the fragrance mentioned here.

27. निजसल्लापमाधुर्यविनिर्भर्त्सितकच्छपी
Sarasvatī’s veena (veena is musical instrument with strings) is called kachapi. It produces a superb melody, in the hands of Sarasvatī Devi, the goddess for fine arts. The voice of Lalitai is more melodious than Sarasvatī’s veena. Saundarya Laharī (verse 66) says: “While Vāni (Sarasvatī) is singing with veena about the various glorious deeds of Śiva and you begin to express words of appreciation, nodding your head, Sarasvatī quickly covers Her veena in its case. The sweetness on the strings of the veena is ridiculed by the soft melody of your eulogistic words.” The explanation provided to the earlier nāma is applicable here too. She attracts the ignorant by the melody of Her voice.

28. मन्दस्मितप्रभापूरमज्जत्कामेशमानसा
Smita means smile and mandasmita means a special benevolent smile. Kāmeśa is Śiva. When Lalitai is sitting on the left thigh of Śiva, they are known as Kāmeśvara and Kāmeśvarī. This form is different from their Ardhanārīśvara form. Śiva is immersed in that beautiful special smile of Lalitai. Kāma also means bindu, a dot. Bindu is a part of kāmakalā bija (īṁ ईं). This bīja has two bindu-s, each representing the sun and the moon. The bindu refers to ego. Kāma and kalā both mean desire. Mind is the cause for desire. When the mind of Śiva Himself is influenced by the smile of Kāmeśvarī, it only speaks about Her glory. She attracts ignorant men by Her smile and offer them salvation by infusing wisdom.

29. अनाकलितसादृश्यचिबुकश्रीविराजिता
She has the most beautiful chin. Saundarya Laharī (verse 67) says “Your incomparable chin that is touched by the forepart of the hand of Śiva is raised frequently out of His eagerness to drink the nectar of your lower lip.”

30. कामेशबद्धमाङ्गल्यसूत्रशोभितकन्धरा
Her neck is adorned with the māṅgalya sūtra (married women wear this) tied by Kāmeśvara. Saundarya Laharī (verse 69) says “The three lines on your neck indicating the number of strings in the auspicious cord fastened at the time of your wedding shine like boundaries, delimiting the position of the gamut, the repositories, of the treasures of various kinds of melodious rāga-s (tunes).” The tying of māṅgalya sūtra is not discussed in Veda-s and possibly a custom followed in later days. As per sāmudrikā śāstra, (interpretation of features of the body) three fine lines in the forehead, eyes or hip indicate prosperity.

31. कनकाङ्गदकेयूरकमनीयभुजान्विता
kanaka – golden; aṅgada – bangles or bracelets; keyūra is a type of ornament worn in the upper arms. She is wearing these ornaments. Possibly, this could mean the following. Both these ornaments are made out of gold and worn in the arms. Though they differ in form, the ingredient gold is the same in both. Though the forms of living beings are different, the innermost Brahman remains the same.

32. रत्नग्रैवेयचिन्ताकलोलमुक्ताफलान्विता
She is wearing a gems embedded golden pendent and a pearl necklace. These ornaments are dangling in Her neck. The dangling of these ornaments is compared to mind. Those who are not capable of meditating Her full form (head to foot) are said to be low class devotees and called as lola-s. Those who are able to meditate on Her full form are said to be high class devotees and called as muktā-s. Lola-s or muktā-s get the benefits (pala) of their prayers according to their category. This is the meaning of lolamuktā-palānvitā. While worshipping Her, one has keep to keep his mind steady, without distractions.

33. कामेश्वरप्रेमरत्नमणिप्रतिपणस्तनी
She offers her two bosoms to Kāmeśvara (Śiva) in return for His love. The subtle meaning is that She will give Her blessings to Her devotees, twice the amount of devotion offered to Her.

34. नाभ्यालवालरोमालिलताफलकुचद्वयी
Her two bosoms are the fruits of the creeper (refers to hair) that springs from Her navel. The significance of this nāma is on the navel and heart cakra-s. Meditating on the heart cakra by upwardly moving the kuṇḍalinī from navel cakra, gives fruits of meditation. Saundarya Laharī (verse 76) says “The God of love afflicted by the fire of Śiva’s anger took shelter in your navel.”

35. लक्ष्यरोमलताधारतासमुन्नेयमध्यमा
Her waist is to be known only from creeper like hair as described in the previous nāma. The secretive meaning is that ātma is subtle and can be known only by keen observation (through meditation).

36. स्तनभारदलन्मध्यपट्टबन्धवलित्रया
The golden belt that She wears supports Her waist as it bends under the heaviness of Her bosoms, resulting in three folds in Her stomach area. Saundarya Laharī (verse 80) says “Your bosoms rubbing at the upper arms, abounding the bodice and the God of love, in order to protect Your hip from breaking has bound Your hip with three fold strands.” The possible interpretation could be that Her compassion to the universe is vast which is referred to as heaviness here. The three lines in Her hip indicate Her three activities – creation, sustenance and dissolution. Her time for compassion is more than Her other activities. After all She is the Supreme Mother.

37. अरुणारुणकौसुम्भवस्त्रभास्वत्कटीतटी
She wears a red silk cloth around Her waist. Red colour means compassion. Everything associated with Her is red in colour, indicating that Her form is full of compassion (one of the reasons of being Śrī Mātā). It can be said that She performs Her three acts (creation, sustenance and dissolution) with compassion. This could also refer to one of the Vāc Devi-s, Arunā. This Sahasranāma was composed by eight Vāc Devi-s. They are Vasini, Kāmeśvari (not Śiva ’s wife), Modhini, Vimalā, Arunā, Jainī, Sarveśvariī and Koulinī. Arunā Vāc Devi is in Her waist. Ratna-kiṅkiṇikā-ramya-raśanā-dāma-bhūṣitā रत्न-ककङ्ककणणका-

38. रत्नकिङ्किणिकारम्यरशनादामभूषिता
She is adorned with girdle studded with mini bells and gems. Devi’s Pañcadaśī mantra consists of three parts or kūṭa-s. Vāgbhava kūṭa was discussed from nāma 13 to 29. Madhya kūṭa was discussed from 30 to 38 and Śaktī kūṭa will be discussed from 39 to 47. Devi’s face is vāgbhava kūṭa, from face to hip is madhya kūṭa (also known as kāmarāja kūṭa) and Śaktī kūṭa is hip downwards. The entire Pañcadaśī mantra is hidden in nāma-s 13 to 47. Her gross description is also discussed from nāma-s 13 to 54.

39. कामेशज्ञातसौभाग्यमार्दवोरुद्वयान्विता
The beauty of Her thighs is known only to Her consort and Creator Kāmeśvara. This indirectly refers to the secretive nature of Śaktī kūṭa of Pañcadaśī that begins from this nāma.

40. माणिक्यमुकुटाकारजानुद्वयविराजिता
Each of Her knees is like a single piece of ruby (again red colour) appearing like a crown.

41. इन्द्रगोपपरिक्षिप्तस्मरतूणाभजङ्घिका
Her calf muscles look like the quiver of Manmatha, the god of love. Saundarya Laharī (verse 83) says “In order to win the heart of your Lord Śiva, the five arrowed cupid God of love has made your legs into an arrow case with ten arrows (toe nails).”

42. गूढगुल्फा
She has round and well shaped ankles that are hidden.

43. कूर्मपृष्ठजयिष्णुप्रपदान्विता
The arch of her feet is more beautiful and curvier than tortoise’s shell. But Śaṇkarā expresses his anger for comparing Her feet to that of tortoise shell, which is hard. Saundarya Laharī (verse 88) says “The toes of your feet is the one that sustains this universe (he is not even comparing the entire feet, he says only about the toes). Lord Śiva knows the softness of your feet that is why He held your feet with great care during your marriage ceremony. How dare they (possibly Vāc Devi-s) compare such soft feet to that of tortoise shell?” This also confirms that Sahasranāma is much older than Saundarya Laharī. Nāma-s 41, 42, and 43 are as per the features described in sāmudrikā lakśanā (study of body parts).

44. नखदीधितिसंछन्ननमज्जनतमोगुणा
The rays of Her nails remove the ignorance of those who bow before Her. When Deva-s and asura-s (demons) pay their reverence to Her by bowing, the rays of the gems emanating from their crowns are in no comparison to the rays emanating from the nails of Her feet. The rays that come out of Her nails destroy the tamo guṇa (inertia) and ignorance of those who worship Her. It is also said that She does not bless with Her hands, but with Her feet. She does not have abhaya and varada hands. Normally one can notice that most of the Gods have four hands, out of which one is meant for blessings and another for giving boons. Lalitai does not have these two hands as She has four powerful goddesses (nāma-s 8, 9, 10 and 11) in Her four hands. The two acts of blessings and granting boons are done by Her lotus feet.

45. पदद्वयप्रभाजालपराकृतसरोरुहा
The beauty of Her feet is much more than a lotus. Generally lotus flower is compared to the eyes and feet of gods and goddesses. In Saundarya Laharī (verse 2) says “Gathering tiniest speck of dust from your lotus feet, Brahma creates the worlds, Viṣṇu sustains them and Śiva pulverising them into ashes besmears His body with them.” There are opinions that She has four feet. They are known as śukla, rakta, miśra and nirvāna. The first two rest in ājña cakra, the third on the heart cakra and the fourth on the sahasrāra. Each of these feet is ruled by Brahma, Viṣṇu, Rudra and Sadāśiva. They stand for creation, sustenance, dissolution and the last one for liberation (or recreation). In Hindu mythology, every act of Nature is represented by a god or goddess. For example, water is represented by lord Varuṇa, fire is represented by Agni, wealth by Kubera, death by Yama etc. It is nothing but worshiping the Nature and the cosmos. Since there are so many forces and energies in the universe, each of them is represented by a god. Saundarya Laharī (verse 3) says, “The particles of dust at your feet serve to remove the inner darkness of the ignorant.”

46. सिञ्जानमणिमञ्जीरमण्डितश्रीपदाम्बुजा
She is wearing anklets made out of precious gems that shine. It is to be noted that five nāma-s 42 to 46 describe only about Her feet. When Her feet alone are described in such a detailed manner, it is beyond human comprehension to think about Her powerful form. This is made so by Vāc Devi-s, to impress about Her prākaśa vimarśa mahā māyā svarūpinī form.

47. मरालीमन्दगमना
Her walking gait is like a female swan. When She comes out of the kunda (nāma 4) and walking towards gods and goddesses, Her gait is described like this. The fact is that Her gait cannot be compared to that of swans, as Her gait is incomparable. In order to give an idea about Her gait such visual comparisons are made. Saundarya Laharī (verse 91) says, “Oh! Goddess of graceful gait! Your household swans, as if intent on practising to balance their steps with tripping gait, do not abandon your feet.” With this nāma the subtle description of Śaktī kūṭa of Pañcadaśī is concluded.

48. महालावण्यशेवधिः
She is the treasure house of beauty. Saundarya Laharī (verse 12) says “The best of thinkers such as Brahma and others are at great pains to find a suitable comparison to your beauty. Even the celestial damsels, out of great eagerness to get a glimpse of your splendour, mentally attain a condition of absorption into Śiva, which is unobtainable even by penance.”

49. सर्वारुणा
Sarvam + aruṇam = everything in red. Everything associated with Her is red. This fact has been highlighted in various nāma-s. Saundarya Laharī (verse 93) says karuṇā kācid aruṇā meaning that Her compassion which is red in colour is beyond comprehension. The same nāma is in Lalitā Triśatī (138). Yajur Veda (4.5.1.7) ‘saysasau yastāmro aruṇa uta babhruḥ sumangalaḥ’ (this comes under Śrī Rudraṁ 1.7) which says that aruṇa (the colour of the sun at the time of dawn) is copper red in colour which is auspicious. ‘The colour of red is auspicious’ says Śruti (Veda-s). No other authority is needed to ascertain Her complexion.

50. अनवद्याङ्गी
Every part of Her body is flawless and in accordance with samudrikā lakśana or śāstra. She is nirguṇa Brahman (without attributes) as well as saguṇa Brahman (with attributes). When She is known as saguṇa Brahman She is with form and attributes. Saguṇa Brahman is discussed here. Brahman is always flawless.

51. सर्वाभरणभूषिता
She is adorned with all types of ornaments. The Kālika Purāṇa mentions forty types of ornaments. Parasurāma Kalpa Sūtra, one of the authoritative texts on Śrī Cakra pūja (ritual worship) mentions more number of ornaments that adorn Her. The nāma 140 in Lalitā Triśatī conveys the same meaning. Though many believe that the description of her physical form ends with this nāma, some scholars are of the opinion that physical description ends with nāma 55 only. However 48 to 51 describe Her form of prakāśa and vimarśa combine.

52. शिवकामेश्वराङ्कस्था
Her seating posture begins from this nāma. She sits on the left thigh of Śiva. This is the form of saguṇa Brahman. Śiva is prakāśa form and self illuminating and Śaktī is His vimarśa form. It is good to meditate upon this posture of Them. Why She is sitting on his left thigh? Heart is on the left side and She is said to be Śiva’s heart (could also mean love). Kāma means handsome, desire, god of love Manmatha. Kāma also means knowledge. Śiva means auspicious. Īśvara means the supreme ruler. Knowledge is said to be the form of Śiva. Perception of heart and mind is the knowledge. Here all the qualities of the saguṇa Brahman are covered. This is saguṇa Brahman because it talks about forms and qualities. Nirguṇa Brahman does not have form and attributes. When māyā or illusion is still associated with Brahman it is called saguṇa Brahman. This saguṇa Brahman is called Śaktī or prakāśa vimarśa mahā māyā svarūpinī. Why kāmā is mentioned here? This kāmā does not mean Manmatha, the god of love. It means the supreme, not the desire with which this word is associated. The desire of the Brahman to create the universe is executed through Śaktī, the auspicious form of the Supreme ruler Śiva. This nāma actually talks about static and kinetic form of energies in unison. This also could mean the creation of the universe.

53. शिवा
There is no difference between Śiva and Śaktī; hence she is called as Śiva. Śiva also means auspiciousness. She is the embodiment of auspiciousness. She is the icchā form of Śiva. There are three types of śakti-s – icchā (desire), jñāna (knowledge) and kriyā (action). Since Śiva is the Brahman and as such He does not have any desires. But His icchā form is reflected in the form Lalitai. Here desire means desire to self-realization. “Yatā Shivā –tatā Devi; Yatā Devi- tatā Shivā” is the saying. Wherever Śiva is, there will be Śaktī and wherever Śaktī is, there will be Śiva. That is why it is said there is no difference between Śiva and Śaktī. Elsewhere it is said that Pārvatī and Parameśvara cannot be separated from each other. This is compared to a word, which cannot be separated from its meaning. They are considered as father and mother of the universe. Scriptures say that there is no difference between Umā (Śaktī) and Śankarā (Śiva). Śankarī is the consort of Śiva and is known as Śiva - Śankarī. She is the māyā Śaktī that is connected to one’s consciousness. How does she look like? She is knowledgeable, self-illuminating (remember our discussions on self-illuminating Brahman), without qualities, the cause of destruction of saṃsārā (desires and related issues) and the bliss. She is Śiva, the supreme Devi, the ocean of mercy and compassion. Men of intellect get everything out of Her. There are two important points mentioned here. One is that, Lalitai is in no way different from Śiva. Both Śiva and Śaktī are in a single form only. Only out of ignorance, we worship them as two separate individuals. Secondly, assuming that we continue to worship Her individual form that has been described in the above verses, still we get all auspicious things. This aspect is discussed in subsequent nāma-s also.

54. स्वाधीनवल्लभा
Her consort (Śiva) belongs to Her alone. This confirms the interpretation of the previous nāma. We have been discussing that Śiva alone created Her to take care of His three acts. For this exclusive purpose, Śiva created Śaktī, the kinetic energy as opposed to the static energy of Śiva. As She is the only creation of Śiva, it is said that Śiva belongs to Her alone. Śiva is the cause of this universe and Śaktī is His power. Without this combination, the universe cannot exist. This is also confirmed by Saundarya Laharī (verse 1). Without being united with Śaktī, Śiva cannot even make a single move. Possibly this can also be interpreted as follows: Brahman is omnipresent. Soul is the jīva where karma-s of living beings are embedded. Neither Brahman nor soul in their individual capacity can create a life. Brahman needs the soul to function with a gross form and the soul needs the Brahman to get a birth. Saundarya Laharī (verse 1) says that Śiva cannot act alone. In the same way Śaktī also cannot act alone. Since the verses are about Śaktī, generally negative points (not qualities) in such cases are vetoed. It is poetic way of expression. With this verse, the physical description of Lalitai is concluded. From nāma-s 53 to 64 it is going to be the description of Śrī Nagara, the place where Lalitai lives. It can be observed in nāma-s 13-54, while describing physical form of Lalitai, some of them are delicate to discuss. Not only in this Sahasranāma, but also in Saundarya Laharī such descriptions are found. Generally a question arises, whether such descriptions are justifiable, beyond a certain level. There could be two possibilities for such narratives. One is the possibility of poetisation, which is generally allowed in poems. One can apply this to Saundarya Laharī, composed by Ādi Śaṅakara. How a great sage like Śaṅakara can make such descriptions? Śaṅakarā is no ordinary person. He is said to be the incarnation of Lord Śiva. If this is true his descriptions can be accepted, subject to the question why he should express such things in public. It is difficult to know the right answer. There should be something extremely subtle in such descriptions, which cannot be comprehended by ordinary humans. Take this Sahasranāma composed by Vāc Devi-s, who are always with Lalitai. Further, this Sahasranāma was recited in the presence of Lalitai Herself. If She found something wrong with the verses, She could have burnt these Vāc Devi-s. She did not do so. So, it is clear that such descriptions are approved by Lalitai Herself. Her Pañcadaśī mantra is meditated upon Her bodily parts which are considered to be highly secretive in nature, though discussed moderately in this edition. Following could be the reasons for such descriptions in this Sahasranāma and elsewhere. The first point is, in any poetic visualization, such narratives are permitted. Poetic skills are expressed through such descriptions. Second thing is to test a devotee whether he gets excited on such descriptions. This is a sort of test before proceeding to higher awareness. Thirdly, such descriptions are part of māyā played by Śaktī. Unless māyā goes away from a person, realizing the Brahman is not possible and hence such descriptions fall under the gaze of māyā. It could also mean the kuṇḍalinī energy and its path. But beyond such reasoning one can think of, none has authority or right to analyze such narrations. One has to understand that the world of illusion is full of desires and one has to cross such desires to reach higher planes of consciousness only after knowing such realities, as realising the reality alone leads to the Brahman. Before closing the discussion on this subject, one should not forget that nirguṇa Brahman is formless and to realize nirguṇa Brahman, one has to realize the saguṇa Brahman (with qualities and form) first. Possibly such narrations could help those not-so-intelligent (those who never heard about the Brahman) people to at least visualize the saguṇa Brahman, perhaps a stepping stone to spirituality.

55. सुमेरुमध्यश‍ृङ्गस्था
From this nāma till 63, the narration of Her abode begins. Sumeru means in the midst of mountains called meru. She lives in the centre of Meru Mountains. Vāc Devi-s in nāma 52 said that Lalitai is seated on the left thigh of Śiva, union of static and kinetic energies. Now they are discussing about her palace. Meru mountain range has three peaks and if a line is drawn connecting them, a triangle is formed. In the midst of this triangle there is a taller peak than the rest of the three where in Lalitai resides. Sage Durvāsa in his master piece Lalithāstavaratna says “I salute the three peaks (the shorter ones) which are abodes of Brahma, Viṣṇu and Śiva. In the midst of these peaks, there is another peak much higher than the other three. The golden rays are beautifying this peak and I worship it.” Possibly this could be the description of Śrī Cakrā. In the middle of Śrī Cakrā there is a triangle and in the centre of this triangle there is dot called bindu in which Lalitai lives with Her consort Mahā Kāmeśvara. Nāma 52 is contemplated on this bindu.

56. श्रीमन्नगरनायिका
She owns this auspicious and wealthy city called Śrī Nagara. There are two narrations about this Śrī Nagara. One is found in Durvasa’s Lalithāstavaratna and another in Rudra Yāmala (as told to Pārvatī by Śiva). The former says that Śrī Nagara was constructed by celestial architect Viśvakarma. Rudra Yāmala says that Śrī Nagara is in the midst of ocean of milk as an island called Ratnadvīpa (island formed out of precious gems). In the midst of Śrī Nagara there is another city called Śrī Vidya that is surrounded by twenty five walls, each wall representing a tattva. So, She is the queen of such a place, from where She performs all Her three acts of creation, etc.

57. चिन्तामणिगृहान्तस्था
She lives in a palace constructed out of Cintāmaṇi, one of the most valuable gems. This gem is supposed to give whatever is desired. This palace is on the northern side of Śrī Nagara, the city. All the gods and goddesses go to this place to worship Her. This is supposed to be the place of origin of all mantra-s. Worshipping this place eradicates all mental afflictions.

58. पञ्चब्रह्मासनस्थिता
She is seated on a throne made up of five Brahmans. The five Brahmans are Brahma, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Īśāna and Sadāśiva (Some used to say Brahma, Viṣṇu, Śiva, Mahādeva and Sadāśiva). Śiva, Mahādeva, Sadāśiva, Kāmeśvara are the different forms of Śiva. Each form represents different acts. Saundarya Laharī (verse 92) says that “Brahma, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Īśvara form the support of Your throne and Sadāśiva is the seat of Your throne”. This nāma affirms Her highest authority of the universe. But, Surely Vāc Devi-s could not have meant to name Brahma, Viṣṇu etc as support of Her throne and Sadāśiva as Her seat. There is another interpretation for this Pañca-Brahman. This could possibly mean the basic elements. We have five cakra-s in our body (mūlādhāra to viśuddhi) and each of these cakra-s represent one element. Mūlādhāra – earth element, svādhiṣṭhāna – water element, maṇipūraka – fire element (some are of the opinion that svādhiṣṭhāna is fire element and maṇipūraka is water), anāhata – air element and viśuddhi – ākāś or ether element. Lalitai is sitting on these five elements, each element forming four legs of Her throne and one forming the seat. This seems to be appropriate as She is the creator and creation is made out of the five basic elements only. After crossing these cakra-s, one has to proceed to ājñā cakra where mind is controlled and then proceed to the crown cakra where the union of Śiva and Śaktī takes place. This explanation suits the interpretations of certain other nāma-s in this Sahasranāma. Nāma-s 249 and 947 also speak about this concept.

59. महापद्माटवीसंस्था
She dwells in a great forest full of lotus flowers. Lotus flower grows only in water. Nature’s bounty has been mentioned here. Big mountains with high peaks were referred earlier. Now indirectly the water bodies are mentioned. Mahāpadma also refers to a type of elephant. This nāma talks about the crown cakra or sahasrāra, situated above the six cakra-s of our body. A minute aperture in the centre of sahasrāra is called brahmarandhra or padmāṭavī. The divine energy enters human body through this aperture only. Human contact with higher planes is established through this aperture. This aperture is connected to all the six cakra-s. Lalitai conjoins Her consort Śiva in sahasrāra. This nāma talks about Her domicile in the middle of a thousand petal lotus or sahasrāra.

60. कदम्बवनवासिनी
She lives in the middle of kadaṃba trees whose flowers have divine fragrance. Her Cintāmaṇi graha is surrounded by a forest of kadaṃba trees. Nature’s greenery is mentioned here. By such narrations, Vāc Devi-s describe Her pṛthivī tattva, the Nature. She is also called Mother Earth. There are about twenty five walls around Her Cintāmaṇi graha, each wall representing a tattva. This Kadaṃba vana (kadamba forest) is situated between the walls of gold (eighth wall) and silver (seventh wall). It is interesting to note that all the goddesses of Śrī Cakra intersect each other in the place between seventh and eighth walls. There are twelve Vedic (solar) months corresponding to English calendar. These twelve months are grouped under six ṛtu-s, each ṛtu consisting of two months. Each ṛtu is ruled by a god. These six gods along with their wives live in their palaces situated between third and eighth walls or forts of Śrī Pura. In between the walls of gold and silver Mantrini Devi who is also called Śyāmala Devi has a palace where She resides. She is the authority of ninety bīja-s of Brahma Vidyā. Refer nāma 10. Vāc Devi-s narrate how Lalitai controls even minute things. From the literal angle certain nāma-s may appear insignificant. But each and every nāma of this Sahasranāma has inner and secretive meaning and also a bījākṣara. By and large, such secretive meanings are not disclosed to everyone. People knowing the secretive nature of this Sahasranāma are extremely rare to find.

61. सुधासागरमध्यस्था
She resides in the middle of the ocean of nectar. Sudhā means nectar, sāgara means ocean and madhyasthā means centre. Sudhāsāgara is a place in sahasrāra. Just before sahasrāra, there is a place called soma cakra. When kuṇḍalinī reaches this soma cakra, due to the extreme heat, a liquid flows down through the throat (nāma 106). This liquid is called sudhā as its viscosity and taste resembles nectar. This liquid is also called amrṭavarśinī. Amrṭam also means nectar. She being present in the middle of this soma cakra in the midst of ocean of nectar causes this nectar to flow into all the 72,000 (nāḍi-s) nerves of human body. It is said that, if this nectar flows into our body, it does not cause death to the physical body. However this is possible only during advanced stage of kuṇḍalinī meditation. This is said to be the reason for long life of great sages. Sudhā sindu also means the bindu in the centre of Śrī Cakra. This is mentioned in Saundarya Laharī (verse 8). This nāma attains great importance because it talks about amrṭavarśinī and the bindu.

62. कामाक्षी
She has lovely eyes. Her eyes are full of grace, compassion and mercy for the universe. That is why, Her eyes are so beautiful. She fulfils all the desires of Her devotees by Her looks alone. Normally, our thoughts are reflected through our eyes. Kāmā is the combination of two bīja-s kā + mā. kā means Sarasvatī and mā means Lakṣmī. These two goddesses are said to be the eyes of Lalitā. Kāmā also means Śiva. This can mean that She is the eyes of Śiva.

63. कामदायिनी
She fulfils whatever is desired. There are several interpretations for this nāma. Kāma means Kāmeśvara, a form of Śiva. Dāyini means giver. It has been discussed earlier that Śaktī alone leads to Śiva and there is no direct access to Him. She takes Her devotees to Śiva, the supreme prakāśa form, the nirguṇa Brahman (Brahman without attributes). She is like a veil around Śiva and unless this veil is removed, Śiva cannot be realized. This veil can be removed only at Her will. Brahma, the creator gave Her two names Kāmākṣī and Kāmeśvarī. This is because of Her omniscient nature. Brahma honoured her with these two names, because He was so impressed with all Her activities, which She does by mere glance. This interpretation indicates Her vimarśa form. Dāyini also means inheritance. She inherits Śiva, meaning that Śiva belongs to Her (possible obsession!). The 59th nāma secretly refers to Vārāhi Devi, 60th nāma refers to Śyamalā Devi, 61st nāma to Kāmākṣī Devi and 62nd nāma refers to Mahā-tripura-sundarī (nāma 234, another form of Śaktī). These references are highly subtle in nature. With this, the description of Her physical or gross form ends. Nāmas 64 to 84 narrate the slaying of demon Bhandāsura. Here begins the narration of Her Supreme form and these recitals are also equally secretive in nature.

64. देवर्षिगणसंघातस्तूयमानात्मवैभवा
From this nāma, till nāma 84, Her slaying of demon Bhaṇḍāsura is described. Deva + rṣi + gaṇa. Deva means gods and goddesses, rṣi means sage and gaṇa means demigods. Agni purāṇa says that there are seven types of gaṇa-s. For example Rudra gaṇa-s mean the assistants or helpers to Śiva. There is a separate stanza (11) in Śrī Rudraṁ offering prayers to Rudra gaṇa-s. Rṣi-s mean great sages like Vasiṣṭha, Nārada, etc. Nārada is also called Deva rṣi. She is worshipped by gods, goddesses, sages, demigods and goddesses. Stūyamānātma means worshipping. Vaibhavā means all pervading. Only Brahman or Pramātman is all pervading. Deva-s and rṣi-s will not worship anybody below the grade of the Supreme Brahman. So this indirectly implies Her status of nirguṇa Brahman. It is also said that sage Nārada (deva) approached Lalitai to slay demon Bhaṇḍāsura who was causing immense trouble to Deva-s and rṣi-s. The deeper meaning of this nāma is - demons here mean the ego arising out of ignorance. Lalitā is approached by them to absolve them of their ego, as She alone is capable of absolving them. Sins are committed because of ego.

65. भण्डासुरवधोद्युक्तशक्तिसेनासमन्विता
She is ready with Her army to wage a war against Bhaṇḍāsura. Her army consists of various goddesses mentioned in Śrī Cakra. There is a story associated with this nāma. Manmatha, the god of love was burnt by Śiva to ashes. Gaṇeśa, playfully collected the ashes of Manmatha and created a man. Brahma, the lord of creation on seeing Gaṇeśa’s act said bhaṇda bhaṇda meaning well done. That was how the demon was named as Bhaṇḍāsura. Since Manmatha was burnt by the fierce fire of the third eye of Śiva, Bhaṇḍāsura was said to be all powerful. He was an embodiment of evils. Bhaṇda also means bondage. Śiva Sūtra (I.2) says jñānam bhandaḥ. The explanation given to bhandaḥ is limited knowledge. This means ignorance is the cause for bondage. Bondage refers to attachments, desires etc. Since lack of knowledge is the cause for duality, it is called bondage. If one has knowledge, he will say I am That (Brahman). Innate nature or unconditioned state of mind is called ānava mala. It refers to the limitation pertaining to empirical individual. It is the primal limiting condition which reduces universal consciousness to a jīva or individual soul. This state of mind is called innate because, the mind does not realise the Brahman and as a result gets bonded. Liberation is needed to get out of this bondage. This liberation is possible only with knowledge. There is another interpretation for such a situation in Śiva Sūtra (I.6) which says that by intense awareness, the various śakti-s (various acts of Śaktī) are united causing the disappearance of the universe (māyā or illusion and duality), leaving the Supreme Consciousness (the Brahman) to be realized. This process is nothing but Self-realization. The secretive meaning of this nāma is – Lalitai is ready to give us liberation from the cycles of birth and death, provided we have inclination to know about Her. Bhaṇḍāsura is an embodiment of ignorance and resultant evil acts. She is ready to wage a war against ignorance and its associated acts. Śakti-senā means Her different acts, not just creation but sustenance and dissolution as well. Her different acts are symbolically represented by various goddesses represented in Śrī Cakra (nāma 996).

66. सम्पत्करीसमारूढसिन्धुरव्रजसेविता
She is worshipped by herds of elephants headed by Sampatkarī. Sampatkarī Devi has already been discussed in nāma 9. There is also a mention about Sampatkarī Vidyā, which is considered as very powerful. There is a three syllable bījākśarā hidden in this nāma that is used in sampatkarī vidyā. Though this bījākśarā is considered very secretive in nature, this has been already discussed in nāma 9. The bījā kroṁ (क्रों) is formed out of three alphabets –ka + ra + ma with a bindu. The alphabet ka stands for joy and fame. The alphabet ra is considered as powerful as it is the bīja of agni, the fire. Any mantra with ra bestows supernatural powers. The alphabet ma stands for comforts in the present and future births. The repeated chanting of kroṁ will give all-round prosperity and happiness. No mantra will fructify without ātma bīja, which should be initiated by one’s Guru. The knowledge, the knower and the known together are called a triad. The knowledge of realising that all the three are the same is called sukha-sampatkar. Śiva Sūtra (I.19) says śaktisandhāne śarīropattiḥ. This means ‘single pointed union (union with intensity and constant awareness) with Śaktī. {śaktisandhānā means that one need not pray to Śiva asking for favours. If one is able to energise his thoughts, what is sought for is achieved. Sandhānā is one of the essential factors of spirituality. Conglutination of fixedness and intensity of awareness are the primary factors in spiritual progression. Without developing the abilities of sandhānā, it is said that initiation into mantra will not fructify and consequently mantra’s contrivance will never be attained.} If Lalitai is meditated upon with the bīja kroṁ the meditator will be endowed with everything that is desired. This could also be interpreted as advancement to the higher level of spiritual realization. Āśvārūḍhā-dhiṣṭhitāśva-koṭikoṭibhi-rāvṛtā आश्वारूढा-

67. अश्वारूढाधिष्ठिताश्वकोटिकोटिभिरावृता
Lalitai is surrounded my many horses headed by Aśvārūḍhā Devi, about whom we have discussed in nāma 8. Aśvārūḍhā Devi is the chief of the horses used in the war. The face of this Devi also looks like a horse. Aśvārūḍhā’s mantra consists of thirteen bīja-s and considered to be very powerful. Out of the thirteen bījākṣara-s, four are recited in the regular order at the beginning and in the inverted order at the end. This is called mantra sampuṭa. Sampuṭa means caged. Such types of mantra-s fructify quickly. Senses are compared to horses as they run faster and without control, if let loose. Mind is the jockey of the horse as mind alone can control the senses. Śiva Sūtra (I.12) says, ‘vismayo yogabhūmikāḥ’. The meaning is slightly complicated but one certainly needs to understand this. The literal meaning is ‘the stations and stages of yoga constitute, fascinating wonder’. Stations mean cakra-s. In these stations consciousness arrives and moves to the next station or higher cakra-s. The consciousness above sahasrārā or the consciousness outside the physical body of the yogi is called turya stage. In this stage yogi’s senses are totally under the control of his inner self which is also called supreme consciousness. In this stage the yogi realises the bliss. In other words realising our own inner self is the ultimate joy that leads to bliss. Station could also mean a well activated ājña cakra, where one could control his senses. Stages mean the level of consciousness. The highest stage of consciousness is called turya stage. The will power with which a yogi establishes his commune with Śiva is called Umā or Kumārī. A yogi treats everything as the same. He does not distinguish between external and internal, I and his, good and bad, etc. This explanation is not out of place here as this nāma talks about controlling senses that wander like horses. There are plenty of spiritual rewards for controlling the senses. Śaktī alone is capable of taking one to Śiva, the Supreme Brahman. Śaktī is māyā. Unless māyā is dispensed with, the Supreme Self cannot be realised. The will power for establishing commune with Śiva is provided only by Śaktī who is called Umā in Śiva sūtra-s. Therefore, Lalitai manifested in different forms and names is the cause for sense-impressions and She alone can remove those impressions, to proceed to higher planes of consciousness and to establish commune with Śiva. Once Śiva is realized, one eternally remains in bliss. Katha Upaniṣhad says senses are horses and the body is the chariot. Objects are the road and Self is the enjoyer (owner of the chariot and horses). Knowledge is incapable of discriminating between good and bad and when connected with uncontrollable mind, then it is like a charioteer or the driver who has to deal with the uncontrollable horses (mind out of control causing all types of miseries). Such explanations are found in Devi Māhātmya (Durgā saptasatī) and Bhagavad Gīta as well.

68. चक्रराजरथारूढसर्वायुधपरिष्कृता
Cakrarāja is the chariot of Lalitāmbikā in which She travels along with all types of weapons. Weapons mean the ways of attaining suddhavidyā or pure knowledge which is called the knowledge of the Brahman. This chariot consists of nine tiers. There are other two chariots that accompany this Cakrarāja the details of which will be discussed in the next two nāma-s. This Cakrarāja is said to mean the Śrī Cakra, the place of Lalitāmbikā. Pariṣkṛtā means adorned. A brief knowledge of Śrī Cakrā becomes a necessity to understand this nāma. Śrī Cakrā consists of nine partitions or angles broadly divided into five Śaktī cakra-s and four Śiva cakra-s. The triangles facing upwards are called Śiva cakra-s, and the triangles facing down are Śaktī cakra-s. Śrī Cakrā contains forty four triangles in which forty three goddesses (44th is Lalitai) and seventy nine yoginīs (demi-goddesses) live. All the gods and goddesses are said to reside in Śrī Cakra and that is why it is said that one can perform pūja to any god/goddess in Śrī Cakra. The nāma 996 Śrī Cakrārāja nilayā confirms Her domicile in Śrī Cakra. Cakrarāja also means the six cakra-s (mūlādhārā to ājña). Ratha means base or foundation. Arūḍha means control and sarvāyudha means pure knowledge which is called suddhavidyā. The six cakras form the foundation to attain pure knowledge through which mind can be controlled in the sixth cakra. The five psychic cakra-s represent the five basic elements and the ājña cakra represents mind. Therefore to control the basic elements and the mind, pure knowledge becomes essential. When cakra-s are controlled, siddhis are attained. When we discuss about suddhavidyā let us also know what Śiva Sutra (I.21) says. It says ‘śuddhavidyodayāccakreśatva siddhiḥ’. This means that only through suddhavidyā (pure knowledge), mastery can be attained over śakti-s. Śaktī-s here means the cakra-s. When one is able to attain mastery over the cakra-s, through the pure knowledge, he can attain the state of Śiva. State of Śiva means oneness with Śiva. In this stage except Śiva nothing exists. Possibly this could mean that he sees everything and everybody as Śiva. This stage is called oneness with universal consciousness. Suddhavidyā is possible only if māyā goes. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta “all sacrifice of work culminates in transcendental knowledge”. The word transcendental means the knowledge of the Supreme. The ultimate meaning is that when mastery over the cakra-s and mind is attained, there is nothing one needs to do except to be with the Brahman always. One has to really admire Vāc Devi-s about their knowledge of expressing the secrets of Self-realization in such a subtle way.

69. गेयचक्ररथारूढमन्त्रिणीपरिसेविता
In the previous nāma it is seen that two chariots always accompany the Cakrarāja chariot. Out of the two, the first one is being discussed here, which is called Geyacakra chariot. This is the chariot of Mantrinī Devi who is also called Śyamalā Devi, about whom we have discussed in nāma10. Mantrinī Devi who owns geycakra worships Her is the literal meaning. As Mantrinī is one of Her ministers, Mantrinī Devi holds Lalitai in high esteem and chooses to worship Her. Worshipping is different from respecting. We have seen that there are seventy nine yoginī-s in Śrī Cakrā. yoginī-s are the great worshippers of Lalitāmbikā. These yoginī-s are also called mantrinī-s (different from Mantrinī or Śyamalā Devi). They are the masters of Śrī Vidyā rituals. This nāma could possibly mean the Śrī Vidyā worship by these yoginī-s. Geya also means important. Geyacakra means important cakra, which is Śrī Cakra. Those who meditate Her in Śrī Cakrā attain mantra siddhi easily. Such a person who attained siddhi is called mantrinī. She is worshipped by those who attained mantra siddhi of Pañcadaśī or ṣodaśī as these are the two main mantra-s of Lalitāmbikā. The importance of worshipping Śrī Cakrā is emphasized here. Human body is compared to Śrī Cakrā in many scriptures. The nine partitions of Śrī Cakrā are compared to nine parts of our body - the orifice in the crown cakra is head, ājña cakra is forehead, viśuddhi cakra is neck, anāhata cakra is heart, maṇipūra cakra is navel, the hip (possibly includes both svādhiṣṭhāna and mūlādhāra cakra-s) and thighs and the feet. It is pertinent to note that the divine energy enters our body through the orifice in the sahasrārā and excess energy if any is grounded through our feet. Śiva Sūtra (II.3) talks about the secret of mantra-s. The illuminating “I” consciousness existing as an essential constituent of various mantra-s (like Pañcadaśī and ṣodaśī), whose essence is the knowledge of realizing the Brahman, is the secret of mantra. Therefore mantra-s are not just the combination of letters, but the Śaktī Herself. Hence these letters are called Mātṛka (Mātṛka means coming from or belonging to a mother. Please refer nāma 1 Śrī Mātā, the Supreme Mother). In the initial stages of spirituality, chanting of mantra-s is considered essential. In this nāma, the importance of mantra and considering our own body as one with Śrī Cakra are emphasized. Considering our body as the one with Śrī Cakra means that She is not different from us, the main principle of Self-realization.

70. किरिचक्ररथारूढदण्डनाथापुरस्कृता
Kiricakra ratha is the chariot of Daṇḍanāthā Devi who is also called Vārāhī Devi. This Devi is considered as very powerful and was already discussed in nāma 11. Kiri means Vārāha. Vārāha means boar (pig). Her face is like a pig. Her chariot is also in the shape of a pig. She is called Daṇḍanāthā because she always carries a daṇḍa (staff) with her. Kiri means rays of light and light here means creation. Possibly this could mean that light is the beginning of creation. The holy Bible says (Genesis.I.3) “And God said, let there be light: There was light”. Cakra means the cycle of creation, sustenance and dissolution. A yogi sits on kiri cakra chariot, meaning that he undergoes the process of creation, sustenance and dissolution. But he is not subjected to the fear of death. How somebody can be beyond death? Death means the destruction of the physical body and not the ātma or soul. A yogi is not concerned about his physical body. Why he is not concerned with his physical body? This is answered by Śiva Himself in Śiva Sūtra that a yogi considers pleasure and pain as external not affecting his ātma or Self. Only if he is associated with antaḥkaraṇa, (mind, intellect, consciousness and ego) he will feel the pain in his body. For him, his physical body is not an object worth considering. As he is free from the bodily afflictions, he feels that he is alone, fully connected to the Supreme Brahman. This was possible to him because he was able to identify his consciousness with the Supreme consciousness, which is called ‘the merger’ or ‘the union’ (union of Śaktī with Śiva). Vārāhī Devi is said to be in our ājña cakra. This nāma indicates the importance of our inner Self and our physical body has nothing to do with the ātma. Though the physical body suffers on account of our karma-s, the ātman is eternally pure and the unification of our self consciousness with the Universal Consciousness leads to the liberation, a stage without birth and death. Nāma-s 68, 69 and 70 talk about the chariots of Lalitāmbikā, Mantrinī (Śyamalā) and Vārāhī. Mantrinī and Vārāhī occupy the next secondary position to Lalitāmbikā, the Supreme. Without worshipping these two and without their permission, none can go anywhere near Lalitai. Mantrinī Devi is the Chief of Her ministers. The entire administration of the universe is under the control of Mantrinī, which is confirmed in nāma 786 Mantriṇī-nyastarājyadhūḥ. Vārāhī is the chief of Her army. Vārāhī has the capacity to drive away the evil forces. If Vārāhī is worshiped on the 18th day of the month of āṣāḍha (July-August), it is believed that those who have difficulties in getting married will get married. These three chariots are always close to each other. As discussed earlier, the chariots mean our mind, possibly the stages of our mind. Jvālāmālinikākṣipta-vahniprākāra-madhyagā

71. ज्वालामालिनिकाक्षिप्तवह्निप्राकारमध्यगा
Jvalāmālini, one of the tithi nityā Devi-s constructed a fortress of fire and Lalitai resides in the midst of this fortress. Tithi Nityā Devi-s are the goddesses of each lunar day. From full moon to new moon there are fifteen days in between and the sixteenth day will be either full moon or new moon. Each of these days is called a tithi and each such tithi is ruled by a goddess. Jvālāmālini is the goddess of fourteenth tithi, called caturdaśi. Lalitāmbikā is called mahā nityā representing both full moon and the new moon (16th day). These goddesses are worshipped in the innermost triangle of Śrī Cakra, five on each side of the triangle. During the war with Bhandāsura, Lalitai asked Jvālāmālini to construct a huge fort of fire to protect Her army. Jvalā mālini means the five Śaktī triangles of Śrī Cakra, akṣipta means mixed, vahni (also meaning fire) prākāra means the four Śiva triangles of Śrī Cakra and madhyagā means resides in the middle. Lalitai resides in the middle of the five Śaktī and four Śiva konā-s or triangles. This point is called bindu or a dot (nāma 905). Jñāni is a wise man and the knower of the Brahman. That is why Kṛṣṇa said He likes jñāni-s. They have also to undergo the cycles of birth and death, as they have not yet merged with the Brahman. But in each of their births, jñāni-s continue to realize the Brahman. As a jñāni, he is in the midst of flames of fire, which destroys ignorance (by its light). Jvalāmāla means garland of fire. Jñāni who is wearing this garland of fire, realises the Brahman. The garland of fire around his neck destroys the darkness of ignorance. When jñāni realizes the Brahman, he is aware of the Creator of this universe, as Brahman is the Creator. Vahniprākāra means surrounded by fire. Here we have two objects. One is jñāni and the other is the flame of fire. The sparks that come out of the fire exist for some time and then turn into ashes. But the fire, from which such sparks originate continue to remain and witness the birth, sustenance and destruction of the sparks that originated from it. The flame of fire is merely witnessing the activities of the sparks, without itself partaking in the activities of the sparks. The fire is compared to the Brahman that remains unaffected by any actions and continues to remain as a mute spectator, witnessing the actions happening around. This concept is more fully described in Spanda kārika (this can be construed as a commentary on Śiva Sutra-s which deals with dynamic aspect of the Divine). It says that there are two stages – one is doer who is the subject and another is the deed, the object. Out of the two, deed is perishable as it is associated with object (sparks of fire), the subject or the doer is not perishable (the flames of fire). Śiva Sutrā also confirms the stage of such jñānis. It says these jñāni-s are like Śiva, but remain in a body that is perishable, retaining their consciousness with Śiva. His physical body is the only difference from him and Śiva. The jñāni who experiences such pure consciousness does not depend upon any objects for his sustenance. This means that a jñāni does not depend on anything for his survival as long his consciousness is with Śiva. This consciousness is verily food for him. The deeper meaning of this nāma is that Lalitai performs all the three acts, creation, sustenance and dissolution. Though She is the cause for all the three acts, She does not participate in any individual action but remains as a witness to such actions. These are the qualities of Brahman; hence She is portrayed as Brahman. More importantly, a jñāni does not depend on or concerned with any external factors, nor is he associated with such factors as his awareness is about the Brahman only. {Further reading on jñāni: A jñāni is one who pursues the path of wisdom known as jñāna mārg. Jñāna is known as knowledge, is typically pure consciousness. The mahā vākya, I am Brahman (ahaṁ bṛhmāsmi अहीं बह्ृमास्स्म) can be resolved under two conditions, ‘I am He’ and ‘I am His’. Both lead to realisation of the Brahman, but under different circumstances. ‘I am He’ signifies the identity of the individual soul with the Brahman leads to the realisation of nirguṇa Brahman (Brahman without attributes). This path is full of challenges and not easily persuable. Perseverance and dedication are key factors to pursue this path. One’s intellect plays a dominant role here, coupled with the level of true devotion one develops. The second path ‘I am His’ is comparatively an easier approach, but not necessarily an inferior approach. This stage is associated with one’s personal deity or iṣṭa devata. Here, Brahman is approached through one’s iṣṭa devata. Realisation of saguṇa Brahman leads to the Ultimate Realisation, which means realisation of Brahman. This is a circuitous approach, but the destination is the same. This path is known as bhakti mārg. There is also a firm view, that the second path is the appropriate path to realise the Brahman, though it is circuitous. While pursuing this path, one undergoes all sorts of experience. He begins with rituals, proceeds, to japa, meditation and finally he begins to search the Brahman within. This transformation happens over several births. Direct approach is extremely difficult and one needs to have tremendous amount of knowledge, will power and mind control. A true jñāni can be described as the one who is able to unite his mind with the wisdom and bliss of his soul after undergoing several but gradual transformation of his mind, as God realisation happens only in the arena of mind.}

72. भण्डसैन्यवधोद्युक्तशक्तिविक्रमहर्षिता
When Her śaktī-s (army) destroyed the army of the demon Bhaṇḍasurā, She was delighted. Bhaṇḍa also means ignorant soul afflicted with duality, sainya (army) also refers to duality (identifying the self as different from the Brahman), and vadha means destruction. Lalitai is delighted when one destroys duality. When duality is removed, it is an indication of the removal of the veil of māyā. The duality can be removed only by internal exploration with the help of mind.

73. नित्यापराक्रमाटोपनिरीक्षणसमुत्सुका
Nitya means tithi nitya devi-s (refer nāma 71). Lalitai was happy on observing the valour of these fifteen tithi nityā devi-s during the war. When duality is destroyed and the veil of māyā is removed, the knowledge of Brahman continues to increase over a period of time. Spiritual progress achieved cannot be reversed that easily (though it can be reversed in exceptional circumstances). This is the secretive meaning of this nāma. Bhaṇḍaputra-vadhodyukta-bālā-vikrama-nanditā भण्डपगि-

74. भण्डपुत्रवधोद्युक्तबालाविक्रमनन्दिता
Bālā is daughter of Lalitai and is nine years old. Bhandāsura had thirty sons. In spite of Lalitai advising Her daughter not to go to the battle field, Bālā prevailed upon her mother and waged a war against all the thirty sons of Bhandāsura and destroyed them. In Śrī Vidya cult, the first initiation is always the mantra of Bālā. If one attains siddhi in Bālā mantra, he can attain super natural powers by using rare herbs. Certain herbs have divine qualities and are capable of conferring superhuman powers to a person provided he has attained siddhi in Bālā mantra. Bālā is the aṅga devata of Lalitāmbikā. Lalitai, Mantrinī and Vārāhī have aṅga devi-s, upāṅga devi-s and pratyaṅga devi-s. Annapūrna Devi is upāṅga Devi and Aśvārūdā Devi is the pratyaṅga Devi of Lalitāmbikā. (aṅga, upāṅga and pratyaṅga refer to gross, subtle and subtler limbs of Devi) The sons of Bhadāsura represent the thirty tattva-s. Unless we cross these tattva-s, realization cannot take place. A small effort (referring to Bālā) from us will destroy the evil effects of the tattvas. Mantriṇyambā-viracita-viśaṅgavadha-toṣitā मस्न्द्िण्यमबा-

75. मन्त्रिण्यम्बाविरचितविषङ्गवधतोषिता
She was delighted with the destruction of demon Viśaṅgavadha by Mantrinī (ṣyamalā) Devi. Viśaṅga and Viśukra are the two brothers of Bhandāsura. There were created by Bhandāsura from his shoulders. There is bīja ‘vi’ (वव) in this nāma . The root of this bīja is the alphabet ‘va’ (व). Va indicates two things. It helps in attaining super natural powers. Secondly it eradicates evil influences. Mantrinī Devi represents the potency of mantra-s. Viśaṅga means desires arising out of the evil effects of sensory organs. Mantrinī Devi destroys such desires of the devotees of Lalitāmbikā.

76. विशुक्रप्राणहरणवाराहीवीर्यनन्दिता
Viśukra is the brother of Bhandāsurā (refer the previous nāma). Vārāhī Devi slayed Viśukra and Lalitai was happy with the bravery of Vārāhī Devi. Nāma-s 74, 75 and 76 talk about Bālā, Mantrinī and Vārāhī Devis. Stain or impurities in Sanskrit is known as mala. The three Devi-s destroy the mental impurities that accrue through our sensory organs. These impurities or stains are called mala, the worst of which is ego. In the case of Bālā it can be interpreted as balā or strength. One needs to have sufficient physical strength to receive the divine power, which is infused through our crown cakra and back head cakra. Mantrinī possibly could mean the potency of Devi’s mantras like Pañcadaśī or ṣodaśī. According to several ancient texts, each mantra is be recited up to a particular number of times, followed by other rituals called puraścaraṇa. Vārāhī is supposed to be the most powerful of the three Devi-s. She cannot tolerate any indiscipline. Possibly, Vārāhī could mean certain austerities to be followed in the worship of Devi. The three qualities viz. the physical strength, control of the mind (controlling the mind happens through the recitation of mantra) and observing certain austerities (sensory organs) make a man realize the Supreme Self within. When such a stage is reached, the devotee uses his body merely as a sheath to get final liberation and merge with Her.

77. कामेश्वरमुखालोककल्पितश्रीगणेश्वरा
Gaṇeśhā was born out of a mere glance of Lalitai at Kāmeśvara. Gaṇeśhā is the first son of Śiva and Pārvathī. Bhandāsura during the war was witnessing the destruction of his army. In order to avoid further causalities to his army he ordered a yantra by name jaya vignaṁ to be kept in the midst of the army of Lalitai. Yantra-s are powerful, only if impregnated with potency of mantra-s. When this yantra was kept, the army of Lalitai started losing their selfconfidence. Mantrinī Devi, who is an authority of mantra-s, noticed this and reported to Lalitai. This yantra can be removed by the one who has won over puryaṣṭaka which consists of the following eight1) five organs of action (karmendriya-s), 2) five organs of senses (jñānaendriya-s), 3) antaḥkaraṇa (four in numbers - manas, buddhi, cittam and ahaṃkāra or ego), 4) five prāṇa-s (prāṇa, apāṇa, etc), 5) five elements (ākāś, air, etc) 6) desire, 7) ignorance and 8) karma. The total components of puryaṣṭaka are twenty seven and with this the attributes of Śiva is added, takes the total to twenty eight. The mūla mantra of Mahā Gaṇapati is twenty eight. When all the twenty seven components of puryaṣṭaka are destroyed, it leads to attributes of Śiva. The attributes of Śiva (saguṇa Brahman) leads to pure Śiva or nirguṇa Brahman (Śiva without attributes). The bliss of realization is attained followed by emancipation. Śiva Sūtra (III.42) says “bhūtakañcukī tadā vimukto bhūaḥ patisamaḥ paraḥ” which is translated as “for him (means a yogi), the five elements are only coverings. At that very moment, he is absolutely liberated. Supreme and just like Śiva.” This nāma talks about the stages that to lead to emancipation.

78. महागणेशनिर्भिन्नविघ्नयन्त्रप्रहर्षिता
This is in continuation of the previous nāma. Gaṇeśa was created to remove the yantra, jaya vignaṁ planted by Bhandāsurā. Gaṇeśā removed that yantra and helped the army of Lalitai to regain their self confidence. Lalitai was delighted with Gaṇeśa, when he removed the yantra. We have to observe the beauty of these two nāma-s. All evil activities are represented by this yantra. Māyā is the cause of evil acts. This māyā is caused by Lalitai and She alone can remove the veil of māyā. Once She decides to remove the veil, pure Śiva is realized. But Lalitai, on Her own, will not remove the veil. She will remove the veil of māyā depending upon one’s efforts. That is why, She is addressed as Guru (nāma 713), later in this Sahasranāma. Bhaṇḍāsurendra-nirmukta-śastra-pratyastra-varṣiṇī

79. भण्डासुरेन्द्रनिर्मुक्तशस्त्रप्रत्यस्त्रवर्षिणी
She counters the weapons used by Bhandāsura, by using Her own. Here, two types of weaponaries are mentioned. One is astra that is thrown at the enemies in a battle field. Modern day bombs can be compared to this. Another is śastra, which is always held in hand, like a gun. The weaponaries of Lalitai aids our efforts in attaining bliss by destroying avidyā. Weapons coming out of Her hands are aimed at us in destroying the illusion of duality. Nāma-s 77, 78 and 79 together convey the steps to be initiated in Self-realization and how She helps one in reaching his supreme goal.

80. कराङ्गुलिनखोत्पन्ननारायणदशाकृतिः
She created ten incarnations (dasa-avatāra) of Śrī Nārāyaṇa from Her nails. Bhandāsura created ten demons like Rāvana and others from his missile Sarvāsurāstra. These ten demons were killed by Lord Mahā Viṣṇu during His ten incarnations. Nārāyaṇa means jīva and Īśvara. Daśākṛitiḥ means five stages of man like awake, asleep, deep sleep, turya (string together the first three. It is a metaphysical consciousness) and turyātīta (level of consciousness above the level of turya. No duality exists here) and the five functions of Brahman namely creation, sustenance, destruction, absorption (blessings) and merger. The five stages of man and the five functions of God together are called daśākṛitiḥ. Possibly Nārāyaṇa mentioned here does not mean Lord Mahā Viṣṇu. Viṣṇu is the brother of Lalitai and hence Vāc Devi-s would not have meant to mean this way. The right explanation would be that She creates the five stages of man and five functions of Brahman from Her nails. The creation from the nails means the ease with which She creates these ten. It has already been discussed about Her prakāśa and vimarśa forms. Every nāma in this Sahasranāma makes a mention to either of these forms. {Further reading on turya and turyātīta: Turya is the fourth state of consciousness, the state higher than the normal three states of consciousness, awake, dream and deep sleep. Turya binds all these states together. The state of turya is the sate of metaphysical consciousness that is different from psychological consciousness or the empirical self. This remains as a witness of the divine. Turyātīta is the state of mind beyond turya where the differenciated perception is totally rescinded. For the one who has attained this state, the entire universe appears as One, leading to perpetual blissfulness.} Mahā-pāśupatāstrāgni-nirdagdhāsura-sainikā महा-

81. महापाशुपतास्त्राग्निनिर्दग्धासुरसैनिका
She burnt the army of the demons with the astra called mahāpāśupatā. This astra produces fire that causes the destruction of the entire enemy camp. Liṇga Purāṇa says that pāśupatā is a rite that is divine and conducive to liberation from the clutches of bondage. This is a propitiation rite to Śiva. Śiva is worshiped in different forms such as Śiva, Mahādeva, Sadāśiva, Paśupati, Kāmeśvara, etc and each form has distinct interpretation. Śiva is the lord of all the creations of the universe hence called as Paśupatī. Paśu refers to living beings. Nāma-s 271 and 272 describe the difference between Īśvarā and Sadāśiva. As per Liṇga Purāna, pāśupatāsta mantra is a six syllable mantra “Om nama Śivāya” (ॐ नमलशवाय). In general Om is not taken into account in any of the mantra-s as all the mantra-s begin with Om. A (अ) + U (उ) + M (म) and bindu constitute Om which indicates creation, sustenance and destruction, the three acts of God. That is why OM is a prefix to all the mantra-s. Nama Śivāya mantra is called pañcākṣara (five syllables). In pāśupatāsta mantra Om is also taken into account and hence called six syllable mantra. This mantra is for Sadāśiva, the higher form of Śiva. (The five faces of Śiva are Īśānā, tatpuruśā, aghorā, vāmadevā and sadyojāthā). These weaponaries mean mental progression from duality to nonduality (destruction of duality). The progress of the mind depends upon practice. Enemy camp means ignorance arising out of duality. With persistent practice, duality gives way to non-duality. Kāmeśvarāstra-nirdagdha-sabhaṇḍāsura-śūnyakā कामेश्वरास्ि-

82. कामेश्वरास्त्रनिर्दग्धसभण्डासुरशून्यका
Śūnyaka is the capital of Bhandāsura. Bhandāsura was burnt along with his capital city by the fire from astrā of Kāmeśvara. The last nāma mentioned about the astrā of Paśupati and in this nāma the astrā of Kāmeśvara is discussed. With this nāma the war with Bhandāsura ends with the killing of Bhandāsura and his warriors along with the destruction of his kingdom. Kāmeśvara form of Śiva is considered as the supreme form than the Paśupati form of Śiva. Kāmeśvara form is the Brahman. Since the attributes are being discussed in this nāma, possibly the present refers to saguṇa Brahman. When we talk about Brahman, it always means the highest level of consciousness. The supreme form of consciousness is not discussed here as Vāc Devi-s continue to discuss Her attributes thereby referring Her form of saguṇa Brahman. There is a definition for Kāmeśvara. He is liked by all and all like Him. Thus He becomes both subject as well as object. Object is Śiva and liking is the subject. Generally, Śiva is always referred as the subject. Vāk Devi-s end this part of Sahasranāma with a subtle hint on renunciation. Renunciation is one of the steps to realise the nirguṇa Brahman. All renunciations are in favour of the Supreme Self (nirguṇa Brahman). This is confirmed in Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (II.4.5) which says, “The Self should be realised, should be heard of, reflected on and meditated upon. By realisation of the Self, all is known.” There is nothing beyond that. Kāmeśvara is the Supreme Self or the Brahman. Bhandāsura refers to ego. Army refers to the subtle body (mind). When ego and activities of subtle body are removed, what remains is only the Brahman. Since Bhandāsura has been destroyed along with his army, what remains is the śūnya or void. This means the thought of duality has gone paving way for realization of the Brahman. The destination can be achieved by meditation and internal exploration.

83. ब्रह्मोपेन्द्रमहेन्द्रादिदेवसंस्तुतवैभवा
The victorious Lalitai is praised by Brahma, Viṣṇu (Upendra means Viṣṇu. Refer Viṣṇu Sahasranāma nāma 57, Mahendra (a form of Śiva) and other gods like Indra, etc. As She is considered as the Supreme power, Gods like Brahma, Viṣṇu and Śiva praise Her. Saṃstuta means praise. Saṃstuta also means internally. Vaibhava means omnipresence. She is worshiped by all, as She is known as the Supreme Ātman. As She is the omnipresent Brahman, Her existence is described both internally (through mind) and externally (through senses). Brahman exists everywhere both internally and externally. This aspect is discussed in the next nāma also. The power of the kinetic energy is explained here.

84. हरनेत्राग्निसंदग्धकामसञ्जीवनौषधिः
Manmatha, the god of love was burnt by the third eye of Śiva. Śaktī resurrected Manmatha. Sañjīvana is an herbal medicine that causes resurrection. Therefore She is praised as sañjīvana for Manmatha. The motherly nature of Lalitai is highlighted here. Manmatha is the son of Śiva and Śaktī. When father is angry with his child, only the mother comes to its rescue. When Śiva was angry with Manmatha, Lalitai came to his rescue. Śiva is a strict disciplinarian. There is a saying that when Śiva is angry, Guru can save a person and if Guru is angry Śiva cannot and will not save that person. Here Lalitai is in the form of a Guru which is substantiated in nāma 603. Śiva was angry with Manmatha and burnt him. But as a Guru, Lalitai saved Manmatha. But this explanation contradicts the general statement that Paramaśiva is the Supreme Guru or āti guru (the first Guru). Śiva is worshiped in Śrī Cakra in guru maṇḍala as Paramaśiva-anandanāda, Hara also means the real nature of the self. Neta means showing the way. Agni, the fire exists everywhere and also causes destruction (one of the acts of agni is destruction, apart from creation). Śiva Sūtra ends by saying that that consciousness of a yogi exists both inwardly and outwardly. Agni also exists both inwardly and out worldly. Agni is used in the all the three acts of God.Therefore, haranetrāgni means that which shows the path to the supreme Self, causing the destruction of desires (kāma) etc which acts as blockades to realisation. The existence of agni everywhere could also mean the existence of ignorance everywhere (because of the presence of ignorance, agni has to exist to dispel ignorance). Ignorance is compared to darkness and the darkness is removed by the presence of agni. The secretive meaning is that liberation means knowing the inner self which is possible only by eradication of ignorance or avidyā. When ignorance is removed, what remains is knowledge or vidyā. That is why the worship of Lalitai is called Śrī Vidyā. Burning of Manmatha is the removal of avidyā and his resurrection is vidyā. Manmatha before his killing was an embodiment of avidyā that mainly comprises of ego and resurrected Manmatha was with pure knowledge. His ego was burnt by Śiva and knowledge was given to him by Śaktī. This nāma possibly could mean the power of the third eye or ājñā cakra wherein the Supreme Guru Śiva gives His commands, either directly or through great sages and saints to His devotees towards Self-realization. If one attaches importance to the usage of netra (eye), it could mean the third eye or ājñā cakra. In ājñā cakra the two nāḍi-s iḍā and piṅgala meet the suṣumna. Suṣumna is considered as the Brahma nāḍi. Iḍā and piṅgala could mean jīva or soul. The merger of soul with the Brahman is called Selfrealization. Self-realization is conveyed here. Saundarya Laharī begins by saying “Śiva becomes capable of creating the universe, only when united with Śaktī, but otherwise, He is incapable of even a throb.” (verse 1). With this nāma, the verses about war with Bhandāsura ends. The mantra form of Lalitai begins from the next nāma.

85. श्रीमद्वाग्भवकूटैकस्वरूपमुखपङ्कजा
Beginning this nāma, Her Pañcadaśī mantra is being explained. Pañcadaśī mantra has been explicated in detail in the introductory chapter. Now, the description of Her subtle form begins. Her subtle form comprises of three divisions viz. subtle, subtler and the subtlest. Subtle form is Pañcadaśī mantra. Her subtler form is kāma-kalā, nāma 322. kāmakalā-rūpā. Her subtlest form is kuṇḍalinī śaktī (nāma 110). In this nāma, Her face is compared to the first kūṭa viz. vāgbhava-kūṭa of Pañcadaśī mantra, which gives knowledge and wisdom. The prefix Śrīmad is used here to indicate the power of Pañcadaśī mantra as a whole. Śrīmad also indicates the respect given to the mantra. Since this kūṭa is described first, this prefix is added to this nāma. kaṇṭhādhaḥ kaṭiparyantha-madhyakūṭa-svarūpiṇī कण्ठाधः

86. कण्ठाधःकटिपर्यन्तमध्यकूटस्वरूपिणी
Madhya kūṭa or the middle group of Pañcadaśī mantra refers to that portion between Her neck and the hip. Previous nāma is jñāna śaktī, this nāma is icchā śaktī and the next nāma is kriyā śaktī.

87. शक्तिकूटैकतापन्नकट्यधोभागधारिणी
Śaktī kūṭa, the last of the three kūṭa-s is compared to Her hip downwards.

88. मूलमन्त्रात्मिका
Mūla means root. Mūlamantra means root of the mantra. Mantra here means Pañcadaśī. She is the root of the Pañcadaśī mantra, which is the root of all other mantra-s. In fact, Her kāmakalā is the root of Pañcadaśī mantra, which is discussed in nāma 322. The Pañcadaśī mantra is superimposed on Her physical form.

89. मूलकूटत्रयकलेवरा
Traya means three. The three kūṭa-s of Pañcadaśī mantra is mentioned here. Kāmakalā is the root of Pañcadaśī mantra. Therefore, it implies that both Her physical and subtle forms represent kāmakalā. Out of the three subtle forms, the first subtle form is Pañcadaśī mantra that we have discussed from nāma 85 to 88. The second subtle form (subtler form), kāmakalā form is discussed here. In a nutshell, kāmakalā is the union of haṃsa and sohaṁ (haṃsa mantra – referring to the universal and the individual Spirit.) having three bindu-s and a triangle. This is the actual physical diagram of Lalitāmbikā. The bīja involved is īṃ ईं. This bīja is extremely powerful and will surely cascade down prosperity if one knows how to use this bīja in ṣodaśī mantra. However this is to be learnt from one’s Guru. With this nāma, the description of Her subtle and subtler forms end. We now proceed to discuss Her subtlest form viz. kuṇḍalinī from nāma 90 to 111.

90. कुलामृतैकरसिका
From this nāma onwards till 111, the subtlest form of Lalitāmbikā will be discussed. Her subtle form is mantra form, either Pañcadaśī or ṣodaśī, Her subtler form is kāmakalā form and Her subtlest form is kuṇḍalinī. Apart from these twenty two nāma-s, detailed descriptions of each cakra-s are mentioned in nāma-s from 475 to 534. But these nāma-s are classified under the head yogini nyāsa and more to do with physical description of the cakra-s. She likes the taste of kulā. Kulā means the nectar or the ambrosial essence that flows from the sahasrāra. When kuṇḍalinī reaches the crown cakra and conjoins with Śiva a few drops of nectar like fluid, ambrosia will flow into the throat. This is also called amṛta varśini. She likes this kulā, not because of its taste, but because of her union with Śiva. This kulā will flow only if kuṇḍalinī reaches sahasrārā. She would never like to move away from Śiva. That is why is she is also called mahā suvāsini (nāma 970) meaning the supreme amongst women of class (supreme sumaṅgali). kulā also means absorption of earth. It indicates mūlādhāra cakra. Mūlādhāra cakra is connected to earth element. The path of kuṇḍalinī from the mūlādhāra cakra to the sahasrāra is also called kulā. Saundarya Laharī (verse 10) says ‘kulakuṇḍe kuhariṇi’ which means, a small orifice in the perineum. Through this orifice, kuṇḍalinī ascends to the higher cakras. Sages live only on this ambrosial essence, which never causes death even to the physical body. There is yet another interpretation. Kulā also means a triad (it is called triputi, meaning three words that leads to a single goal.) In this case knower, known and knowledge are known as a triad. Knower is the sādhaka, knowledge is the path that leads the sādhaka to the known and known is Lalitāmbikā. There should be no difference between these three and this knowledge alone leads to self-realization. At this stage, the duality ceases to exist and nonduality dawns.

91. कुलसङ्केतपालिनी
In this nāma kula means race or family. She guards the secrecy of the kula or the family of Her worshippers. Everything that belongs toHer is highly secretive in nature. For example Her Pañcadaśī and ṣodaśī mantra-s, Her kāmakalā form, Her kuṇḍalinī form, the ritual worship called navāvarana pūja etc. Out of all this, her kāmakalā form and Pañcadaśī mantra are highly secretive in nature. The secrecy is on account of two factors. One is that such mantra-s should not be elaborately discussed because, if they fall in the wrong hands, by mastering such mantra-s they could harm the society. Secondly, Her physical and kāmakalā forms are highly intimate in nature and hence cannot and should not be described in detail. But if they are continued to be kept as secrets, those who really want to understand the inherent meanings of such descriptions may not have the opportunity to know them. Hence, an attempt is being made in this book about providing certain details that are very essential to interpret a nāma. This nāma says that She Herself protects these secrets from those who are not worthy of knowing them.

92. कुलाङ्गना
She hails from the family of chaste women. Such women protect the honour of the lineage they hail from and protect the lineage of the families of their husbands as well. In another interpretation it is said that, such women cannot be seen much in public. Lalitāmbikā, being supreme amongst such women protect Herself with the veil of avidyā or ignorance. Saundarya Laharī (verse 9) says “in sahasrāra you conjoin with your consort Śiva secretively.” It is explained that by breaking the six psychic planes, conquering twenty five tattva-s, She, in the form of kuṇḍalinī reaches sahasrāra and there unites with Sadāśiva tattva. This union is considered as a separate tattva known as sādākhya tattva. This tattva is also known as Para-Brahman, the complete identity of Lalitāmbikā with Sadāśiva. This stage is also known as tādātmya. Such is the interpretation of Śrī Śaṁkara for chaste women. Śrī Vidyā ritual worship is considered as the most secretive. This ritual is called navāvaraṇa pūja. If this is performed in the right way, it will surely bestow everything on earth to the person who performs this worship. Most of the navāvaraṇa pūja-s performed today is purely for pomp and vanity. Pomp and vanity have no place in the worship of Lalitāmbikā. Secondly, there are many deviations from the prescribed rituals. Any ritual not performed according to the prescribed methods does not yield results. For the sake of convenience, nothing can be compromised in rituals.

93. कुलान्तस्था
Kulā also means scriptures. She resides in the midst of these scriptures. This nāma could possibly mean Devi Sarasvatī, the goddess of letters, as She is supposed to be the root for all scriptures. This also means the spinal cord or suṣumna and is called the path of kulā. In the triad we have seen earlier (nāma 90), that she is in the form of worthy of knowing (known). She is the object of the knowledge of kulā. Kula means Śaktī. Śaktī prevails everywhere i.e. omnipresence. This situation is well described in Kena Upaniṣad as ‘pratibodha-viditam’ which means ‘known at all levels of sādhaka’s consciousnesses.

94. कौलिनी
She is the core of kaula worship. Kaula worship is a tantric worship under śākta method (methods of worshipping Śaktī is called śākta worship). Since She is the centre of this worship She is called kaulīnī. As She is worshiped everywhere (omnipresence), She is called as kaulīnī (as per triad – worshipper, worshipped and worship). Tantra śāstra define Śaktī as kulā and Śiva as akula. The union of Śiva and Śaktī is called as kaula and She is called kuṇḍalinī. This union takes place in sahasrāra. There is a reference in some tantra texts to one more thousand petal lotus, just below the thousand petal lotus, is the sahasrāra. In the centre of the second sahasrāra, Kula Devi is worshiped and in the petals kula Śaktīs are worshiped. Kaulīni also means this kula Devi, the goddess of one’s lineage. One of the Vāc-Devi-s, the authors of this Sahasranāma is known as Kaulīnī. The external worship of cakras, possibly meaning that Śrī Cakra is also called kaulīnī.

95. कुलयोगिनी
Kaulā means mental worship. Here it means offering mental worship to Her in the six cakra-s. Mental worship can be performed only through yoga. Kula means mūlādhārā cakra and akula means sahasrāra. The link between these can be established only by yogic methods. That is why she is called as Kulayoginī.

96. अकुला
She does not have genealogy, hence akula. She was created by Śiva and hence no parentage. Akula also means beyond kula, the six cakra-s. Akula is beyond the six cakra-s, which means, beyond sahasrāra. Sahasrāra is not considered as a cakra. It is said that suṣumna has two lotuses at both the ends, one at top in the crown which has thousand petals and is called akula sahasrāra. Since She resides here, She is called akula. The other one is at the bottom and has two petals and this is called kula sahasrāra. Kula sahasrāra does not mean the mūlādhāra cakra that has four petals. From nāma 90 to 96 it can be observed that how a single word kula has been used in seven contexts. The beauty of this is, nāma 90 starts by saying that She likes the taste of the ambrosia and nāma 96 ends by saying that she is beyond kula.

97. समयान्तस्था
She is centre of samayā doctrine. Samayā means internal or mental worship, while kula means external worship. Mental worship is more powerful than external rituals. The internal worship has been emphasized by five great sages - Vāsiṣṭhta, Śuka, Sanaka, Sanāndana and Sanathkumāra. They have prescribed procedures for internal worship and their writings are called tantra-pañcaka meaning five tantra-s. This nāma underlines the equality between Śiva and Śaktī. This equality is classified under five heads. Śiva is called Samayaḥ and Śaktī is called Samayā as per Sanskrit grammar. The five fold equalities are: 1. In terms of equality of place of worship such as worshipping both of them in Śrī Cakra or in Liṅga form. In the bindu, the centre point of Śrī Cakra, both of them are worshipped. In psychic cakra-s of kuṇḍalinī also, they are worshiped – Śaktī uniting with Śiva at sahasrāra. Śrī Cakra worship is mostly external and kuṇḍalinī worship is always internal. 2. In terms of functions such as creation, sustenance and dissolution. Since there is equality between the two, their functions remain the same. They are called father and mother of the universe. They cannot be separated under any circumstances. 3. In terms of actions such as dancing. The significance of dancing by them will be dealt with in later nāma-s. When a woman dances, it is called nāṭyā and when a man dances it is called tāṇḍavā. Śiva tāṇḍavā is well known. 4. In terms of names such as Bhairava and Bhairavī; Parameśvara and Parameśvarī; Rājarājeśvara and Rājarājeśvarī; Śiva and Śiva (Lalitai is called as Śivā in nāma 53); Kāmeśvara and Kāmeśvarī etc. (When one says Śiva Śivā it does not mean Śiva alone. The second Śiva is pronounced as Śivā with an extra a (a + a = ā). Śiva the Supreme means fortunate, happiness, welfare, liberation, final emancipation, auspicious. Śivā means the energy of Śiva personified as His consort. Therefore when one says Śiva Śivā it means both Śiva and Śaktī. She alone holds independent Power of Autonomy (svātanraya śakti) and He has given a Power of Attorney to Śaktī permitting His Power of Autonomy to be used by Her. 5. In terms of forms such as their complexion, their weaponries, etc. In terms of complexion both appear as red. Lalitai is red in complexion. Śiva is pure white like a spatika (crystal). The specialty of spatika is that it gets reflected with the colour of the properties nearby. When Lalitai sits by the side of Śiva or on the lap of Śiva, His translucent crystal complexion also appears as red. The gods and goddesses who witness this glorious scene compare this to the rising sun. This scene could lead to an inference that Śaktī is more potent than Śiva as Śiva only reflects the colour of Śaktī. Both of them hold the same four weaponries. It is always ideal to worship both Śiva and Śaktī together. They should never be separated either in worship or in meditation. In worshipping Viṣṇu, Lakṣmī should never be separated from Him. Lalitai sits on the left thigh of Śiva and Lakṣmī is in the chest of Viṣṇu (śrīvatsa). There is yet another form of Lakṣmī sitting on the lap of Viṣṇu known as Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa. {Further reading on kula and kaula: Kula means race, community, etc. Those who worship Śaktī are called kula. They are also known as śaktā-s, their tenets being contained in the, tantra-s. Their rituals are of two kinds, the impurer called vāmācāra, and the purer dakṣiṇācāra. Kaula generally rferes to those who worship Śaktī and in particular the followers of vāmācāra.}

98. समयाचारतत्परा
Worshipping Lalitai in the cakra-s of kuṇḍalinī, beginning from mūlādhāra cakra is called samayācāra. This is explained in Rudrayāmala, an ancient scripture, as told by Śiva Himself to Śaktī. This nāma means that She likes samayācāra worship. This worship can be done only mentally. Initiation from a Guru is the first step in this worship. This initiation will culminate in pūrṇa abhiṣeka (mantra bath) that will be performed by guru to the disciple. The initiation by the guru will make the kuṇḍalinī ascend from the perineum to the six cakra-s. Guru will guide his disciple at each level and at each cakra. Guru will not perform the mantra bath on the disciple unless he is convinced that the disciple has attained a particular stage from where, the disciple could carryon on his own. Guru also will not perform this ritual unless the disciple pursues the right path of Self realisation. After this ritual of mantra bath, there is yet another ritual called mahā veda samskāra, a fire ritual. This mahā veda saṃskāra will be done only on the day of mahā navami (ninth day of Dasara celebrations) which occurs once in a year. (After completing all such formalities, the sādhaka (practitioner) will have to go to an isolated place and commences his samayācāra meditation, i.e. meditation on the six cakra-s and the sahasrāra. There is a prescribed procedure for this worship. Kuṇḍalinī is aroused from the perineum and taken to mūlādhāra cakra. She is in Her subtle form viz. mantra form in this cakra. From mūlādhāra cakra, She is taken to the next higher cakra viz. svādhiṣṭhāna cakra. She has to be mentally worshipped in this cakra. She is in Her subtler form viz. kāmakalā form at this stage. After the worship at this cakra, She is adorned with rich clothes and ornaments. Remember that everything associated with Her is red in colour. She is then taken to maṇipūraka cakra. At this stage, changes occur in the gross body of the sādhaka. People around him start noticing these changes. In this cakra, She is offered arghya, pādya, etc (washing Her hands and feet) and She accepts the offerings made by the sādhaka. Then She is made to adorn the throne that has been discussed in nāma 3. In this cakra She is in Her subtlest form viz. Kuṇḍalinī. Kuṇḍalinī energy gets the name of Kuṇḍalinī only from the navel cakra. From this cakra onwards, She becomes very powerful. It is to be remembered that this is a mental worship that happens within. Then she is taken to the heart cakra or anāhata cakra, where She is offered betel leaves (karpūra vītikā - nāma 26). She is then taken to viśuddhi cakra where is worshiped with ārati. Ārati means offering (showing) various types of lamps lit with pure ghee (clarified butter). Each such ārati has its own significance. For example pañca ārati means the five elements, ‘pūrṇa kumbha ārati signifies that everything was created out of totality and everything merges in totality. From viśuddhi cakra, she is then taken to ājñā cakra, where is offered ‘karpūra ārati. karpūra ārati means ārati lit with camphor. Ārati with camphor has a lot of significance (Pure camphor is not easily available nowadays. If pure camphor is not available, it is better to use a ghee lamp, which does not cause pollution. The soot coming out of impure camphor affects the purity of the energy level that prevails during rituals.) She is adorned with garlands of sweet smelling flowers and perfumes. She is to be visualized as a bride at this stage. She is then taken to sahasrāra where Śiva is waiting for Her. When She enters sahasrāra, a veil is placed around them and the sādhaka awaits Her return. Once She returns from sahasrāra, She is taken back to mūlādhāra cakra. This nāma means that She likes this type of worship. Kuṇḍalinī meditation is highlighted here. Śaktī alone can take one to Śiva, the Supreme Brahman. The Supreme Brahman is Śiva and Śaktī is māyā. There is yet another interpretation possible for this nāma. Kuṇḍalinī represents jīva-ātma or soul. Soul is a dynamic energy where our karma-s are embedded. When the soul merges with Paramātma or the Brahman, this is called Śiva-Śaktī union. The merger of jivātma with Paramātma is discussed in this nāma. Further it is also emphasized that emancipation can take place only if Kuṇḍalinī reaches sahasrāra. Repeated practice of this samāyāchara worship is necessary to stay with the Brahman forever.

99. मूलाधारैकनिलया
She resides in mūlādhāra cakra. Mūla means root and ādhāra means support. That is why mūlādhāra cakra is called the base (foundational) cakra. A detailed study of mūlādhāra cakra is made from nāma-s 514 to 520.

100. ब्रह्मग्रन्थिविभेदिनी
She pierces the brahma granthi. There are three knots called granthi-s in three places in the path of Kuṇḍalinī. These granthi-s are to be pierced to make the Kuṇḍalinī ascend to the higher cakras. First of such granthi-s is found above the mūlādhāra cakra and below the svādhiṣṭhāna cakra. Kuṇḍalinī has to pierce the brahma granthi to reach the svādhiṣṭhāna cakra.

101. मणिपूरान्तरुदिता
She appears in the navel cakra. It was seen in nāma 98, that She is well decorated and sits on the throne in the navel cakra. Saundarya Laharī (verse 40) beautifully describes maṇipūraka cakra. “I worship that redoubtable dark-blue cloud, abiding forever in you maṇipūraka cakra, endowed with lightning in the form of Śaktī, whose lustre controverts darkness, with a rainbow caused by the sparkling variegated gems set in the jewels (of the Kuṇḍalinī ) and showering rain over the worlds scorched by Hara (fire) and Mihira (sun; certain dictionaries say moon).” In deep stage of meditation, one will be able to see bright light in the form of a bow. A detailed study of this cakra is made from nāma-s 495 to 503.

102. विष्णुग्रन्थिविभेदिनी
She pierces the second knot called Viṣṇu granthi, which is just above the navel cakra. Lord Viṣṇu resides in maṇipūraka cakra and that is why the knot above this cakra is called Viṣṇu granthi. Lord Viṣṇu is the authority for the sustenance of this universe. When a sādhaka could cross the navel cakra, it means that he exists beyond sustenance. Sustenance is only for ordinary living beings. Beyond sustenance means sages and yogi-s. They can sustain themselves on the ambrosia, the nectar that has been discussed earlier.

103. आज्ञाचक्रान्तरालस्था
She resides in ājñā cakra which is also known as third eye. This is the last of the six cakra-s and this cakra belongs to one’s guru from where he gives his commands to the sādhaka. In this cakra, a sādhaka gains a little knowledge about the Brahman. In the previous five cakra-s, all the basic elements were identified. But this cakra is related to mind. Mind is the instrument for acquiring knowledge. Saundarya Laharī (verse 36) describes this cakra. “I worship the supreme Śiva (paraṃ śaṃbhuṃ) who abides in your ājñā cakra, covered by parā-cit on the sides and having the splendour of billions of sun and moon.” This verse underlines the mental worship of both Śiva and Śaktī. Ājñā cakra is associated with mind. Kṛṣṇa tells Arjuna (Bhagavad Gīta XI.8), “You cannot see me with your physical eyes. I now give you divine eyes (the third eye or the ājñā cakra)”. Ājñā cakra is described in detail in nāma-s 521 to 528.

104. रुद्रग्रन्थिविभेदिनी
She breaks the Rudra granthi and proceeds to sahasrāra. This is the last of the three knots. It has already been seen that Pañcadaśī mantra has three kūṭa-s and each kūṭa ends with hrīṃ (ह्रीं). Therefore, Pañcadaśī mantra has three hrīṃ-s. Each hrīṃ represents one granthi or knot. The bīja hrīṃ represents the candra kalā, (divisions of moon) whereas the other bīja-s in each of the kūṭa-s represent agni (fire), sun and moon (Please refer details at the end of nāma 84). Once this granthi is crossed, Kuṇḍalinī reaches sahasrāra where she unites with Śiva. However, there are minor cakra-s in between ājñā and sahasrāra. The union of Śiva and Śaktī is represented by the bījā hrīṃ. Pañcadaśī mantra represents only the six cakra-s and three granthi-s. It does not mention about sahasrāra, which is beyond the subtler (kāmakalā) and subtlest (Kuṇḍalinī) forms of Lalitāmbikā. Once this last granthi is passed over, all the vāsana-s (impressions) go away leading to supreme knowledge. Till this point Kuṇḍalinī had to cross too many resistances to reach Her final destination. In the next nāma Her destination is explained. During the last leg of one’s journey to his domicile, (for example the flight is about to land) one always feels the happiness of seeing his dear ones. This is the sort of happiness She derives at this stage. She grants whatever boons one asks for at this cakra.

105. सहस्राराम्बुजारूढा
She has now reached Her destination, the sahasrāra, where Śiva is waiting for Her. Sahasrāra is just below the brahmarandhra, an orifice in the skull that connects to cosmos (The existence of this orifice has not been medically proved. Perhaps this is like the pores that exist in our skin through which sweat comes out. But one can distinctly feel the cosmic connection through this orifice). The union of Śiva and Śaktī takes place at sahasrāra. The sādhaka, who all along was worshipping only the Śaktī, begins to worship Her along with Her creator, Śiva. There are fifty alphabets in Sanskrit (in another version it is fifty one including one more ḻa ळ). Based on these alphabets and multiplying this fifty by numeric twenty (made up of five basic elements, five karmendriya-s, five jñānendriya-s and five tanmātra-s) one thousand is arrived. This one thousand is said to be the number of psychic petals of an imaginary lotus flower in sahasrāra. Please refer ‘further reading on Sanskirt letters’ at the end of nāma 833).

106. सुधासाराभिवर्षिणी
There is one soma chakra in the middle of sahasrāra. When Kuṇḍalinī reaches this cakra, out of the heat generated by Her presence, the ambrosia which is stored there gets melted and drips through the throat and enters the entire nervous system. Soma cakra is discussed in nāma 240. Tantric interpretation of this ambrosia differs from this interpretation. Saundarya Laharī (verse 10) says, “You drench the nādi-s (nerves) in the body with the flood of nectar gushing through Your feet.” {Further reading on ambrosia: The followers of samayācāra, (worshipping Her through the cakra-s of Kuṇḍalinī, beginning from mūlādhāra is called samayācāra. Please refer nāma 98) both the planet moon and cit-candra-mandalā (nāma 240) (cit means foundational consciousness) at sahasrāra represent Śrī Cakra as both have similar qualities. Both shed nectar. Her lotus feet deemed to shine in the moon region of śrī Cakra. Moon is the master of all medicinal herbs that are said to ooze divine water known as nectar.}

107. तडिल्लतासमरुचिः
She shines like a line of lightning. In the advanced stage of Kuṇḍalinī meditation, one can realize the entire spinal cord glowing like a flash of lightning. Till this nāma, this kind of epithet was not used, but used here for the first time as She is now with Her spouse. She shines like a lightning when She is with Śiva. There are instances of comparing the Brahman to lightning. Kena Upaniṣad (IV.4) explains Brahman beautifully. It says “It is like a flash of lightning…Just as lightning comes in a flash and removes darkness; Self realization dawns in a fraction of a second and removes the darkness of ignorance”. Mahā Nārāyana Upaniṣad (XIII.11) (Nārāyaṇa sūkta) says vidyallokhā meaning flash of light. Therefore it is apparent that Lalitāmbikā is referred to as the Brahman in this nāma. This nāma fortifies the argument that both Śiva and Śaktī are the Brahman. Śiva is the nirguṇa Brahman and Śaktī is saguṇa Brahman (nirguṇa means without attributes and saguṇa means with attributes). Śaktī attains potency only if She remains with Śiva. Śiva also becomes inert without Śaktī. This argument is strengthened by this nāma as She is compared to lightning only during Her union with Śiva. Some texts use Taṭillatā instead of Taḍillatā. However this difference does not alter the meaning.

108. षट्चक्रोपरिसंस्थिता
She is above the six cakra-s starting from mūlādhāra to ājñā cakras. She is now at sahasrāra, which is not a cakra. As sahasrāra is above the six cakra-s, hence this nāma. There is another interpretation possible. It has been seen earlier, that She is the Brahman when united with Śiva. To realise the Brahman in sahasrāra, one has to cross the lower cakra-s, all of which are associated with worldly acts. Sahasrāra is above the worldly acts. That is why She is said to be above these six cakra-s, meaning that the Brahman is above the six cakra-s.

109. महासक्तिः
Maha means festivals and asaktiḥ means great liking. She has a great liking for festivities. Here festival means Her union with Śiva. Festivities are of two kinds. One that is celebrated internally (associated with mind) and another is external worship (associated with body). If this nāma is interpreted, based on Saundarya Laharī (verse 9) mahīṁ mūlādhāre, (meaning – the earth is placed in mūlādhāra) then it means only internal worship, worshipping Her subtlest form Kuṇḍalinī. She likes internal worship. Maha means supremacy, ā means on all sides and Śaktī means supreme. Her supreme power is spread across everywhere. In this context, this nāma means that She is the Supreme power.

110. कुण्डलिनी
She is in the form of a three and a half coiled snake in mūlādhāra cakra. Her subtlest form is described in this single nāma. Her subtler form kāmakalā (nāma 322) is also described in a single nāma. But Vāc Devi-s used nāmas 13 to 54 to describe Her subtle form. This also goes to prove the importance of internal worship or meditation than the external rituals. The vital energy of prāṇa is called kuṇḍalinī. This lies in the mūlādhāra cakra in the midst of fire that keeps biological body warm. Any modification in the intensity of this fire causes sickness. The sound of the Kuṇḍalinī can be felt by anyone. If one closes both his ears tightly, he can listen to a hissing sound, the sound of Kuṇḍalinī from within. The base cakra is a triangle where icchā, jñāna and kriyā śakti-s (desire, knowledge and action) form the three sides. From these three śaktis (potencies) the sound of OM a, u and m is generated. Yogavāsiṣṭha (the compendium of teachings of sage Vāsiṣṭha to Lord Rāma) in nirvāna prakaraṇa (the last of six chapters) talks about Kuṇḍalinī. Sage Vāsiṣṭha says to Lord Rāma “Like the coiled body of a serpent when it sleeps…like a plantain flower it is exceedingly delicate within…hissing like an angry female serpent…causing fluctuations in the mind. All other nādi-s are connected with this. This becomes purified only by the rays of jñāna or knowledge….thus this Śaktī rejoices in the name of puryaṣṭaka. Should the upward and downward actions of this Kuṇḍalinī śakti be arrested by the control of prāṇa and this prāṇa be made to rest in the heart, diseases will never affect those who have such control.” Yoga-vāsiṣṭha also talks about siddhi-s. Kānci Paramācāryā in his magnum opus ‘Voice of God’ observed the following about Kuṇḍalinī yoga: “Kuṇḍalinī yoga is not the only path available to the seeker. Choose any path other than it, adhere to it with a mind that is one-pointed and with faith and sincerity. As you advance to a high state on this path, your breathing will change automatically and it will be similar to that of one practising yoga-s. You may even be aware of it; the breathing will change on its own” and after saying that one’s breath will undergo modifications, he says, “....the movement of breath will impinge on the nerves in the roof of our head and touching the feet of Ambāl (referring to Śaktī) create a flow of ambrosia. Even in worldly life when we are in ecstasy of delight our breathing stops and we faint. In this there is reflection of the emotion experienced by us during kumbhaka (holding breath). During this time we excalim: ‘Ah, I feel cool in the crown of my head.’ This also means that a tiny droplet of the ambrosia has trickleld on the nerves in the crown of the head. I have said this to show that even by following the path of devotion you can have inward experience of sublime nature.” Viṣṇu Sahasranāma nāma 907 is kuṇḍaline. {Further reading on puryaṣṭaka: (as told by sage Vāsiṣṭha to Lord Rama in Yoga-vāsiṣṭha - VI.5). Brahman who is without beginning or end and which is the seed of the universe, becoming differentiated is jīva (soul); subjecting itself to the idea of separateness, it becomes ahaṃkāra (ego) with manana (contemplation), it becomes manas (mind); with the certainty of intelligence, it becomes buddhi (intellect); then the five elements (sound, etc) through indriyā-s (sensory organs). With the thought of the body, it becomes the body itself; with the thought of a vessel, it becomes the vessel. A form (subtle body), having such a nature is called puryaṣṭaka body or eight constituents of the body. The eight constituents are mind, ego, intellect, sound, touch, sight, taste and smell, the last five together known as tanmātra-s.}

111. बिसतन्तुतनीयसी
She is like the minute fibre of a lotus stalk. This is the last of the nāma-s that describe Her subtlest form. She is like a young girl in the lower cakra-s as She makes sound in the mūlādhārā cakra, gets dressed like a bride in the navel cakra and proceeds to meet her spouse Śiva in sahasrāra. There are many references for this description. These descriptions ultimately point to the path of Kuṇḍalinī, the inner canal of the spinal cord which is extremely subtle and almost invisible. When Kuṇḍalinī ascends through this middle canal without any blocks or deviations, it shines like a lightning. Since it has such immense potency, it confers on the sādhaka certain siddhi-s before it reaches the crown cakra. If the sādhaka misuses such powers, he will not be able to realize the Brahman and also gets punished. Though She has the burning desire to conjoin Her spouse, She certainly knows how Her power has been utilized by the sādhaka during Her sojourn in various cakra-s of the sādhaka. She never forgets the duties allotted to Her by Śiva. Possibly, the Vāc Devi-s used two nāma-s to emphasise both Her minute (this nāma), and mahat or supreme (nāma 109) forms, as otherwise there is no necessity for them to talk about anything else after describing Her subtlest Kuṇḍalinī form (nāma 110). Nārāyaṇa sūkta describes Kuṇḍalinī thus: “The place for His meditation is the ether in the heart, the heart which is comparable to an inverted lotus bud. It should be known that the heart which is located just at the distance of a finger span below the Adam’s apple and above the navel is the great abode of the universe. Like the bud of a lotus, suspends in an inverted position, the heart surrounded by arteries. In it or near it there is a narrow space (suṣumna). In it everything is supported. In the middle of that remains the nondecaying, all knowing, multi faced, great fire, which has flames on every side, which enjoys the food presented before it, which remains assimilating food consumed and which warms its own body from the insole to the crown. In the centre of that fire, which permeates the whole body, there abides a tongue of fire, of the colour of shining gold, which is the topmost among the subtle, which is dazzling like the flash of lightning that appears in the middle of a rain-bearing cloud, which is as slender as the awn of paddy grain and which serves as a comparison to illustrate subtlety.” Possibly this nāma could also mean the citrini nādi, which is the central canal of the spinal cord through which Kuṇḍalinī ascends and descends. With this nāma the description of Her Kuṇḍalinī form ends and from the next nāma, the description of Her blessings begin.

112. भवानी
Beginning from this nāma till nāma 131 the significant aspect of blessing Her devotees is described. Bhava means Śiva, particularly his form of Mahādeva and ana means infusing life. She, the wife of Śiva gives life to all or as Śrī Mātā, She gives life. Since She gave back life to Manmatha (Manmatha is also known as Bhava) she is addressed as Bhavānī. Śiva is known as Bhava because the universe was created from Him (bhava means produced from) and being sustained by Him. Though grammatically, Bhava and Bhavānī may differ, but the actions of both Bhava and Bhavānī remain the same. . The famous verse of Saundarya Laharī (verse 22) says “Bhavānī tvaṃ” meaning You are Bhavānī. The verse further says, “When one is desirous of paying to You as Oh! Bhavā’s consort! May You cast Your gracious glance on me, Your servant utters the name of Bhavā’s consort (meaning Bhavānī). You, at that very moment grant him the state of absorption into You.” {Further reading on absorption: Absorption means the metnal state that is completely filled with God consciousness. Individual consciousness submerged in God consciousness is absorption. The word Bhavānī is used in the above verse is intended by the devotee as an address to Lalitāmbikā in the vocative case. But, as a verb in the first person of the imperative mood, it would mean ‘let me become’. As soon as the first two words Bhavānī tvaṃ are uttered, She rushes to grant him absorption in Her own Self. She becomes so elated and happy of being addressed as Bhavā’s consort, She does not even wait for the verse to be completed. She acts immediately on listening to those two words Bhavānī tvaṃ, interpreting them as ‘Let me become Thyself’. This translates into mahā vākyā “Tat Tvam Asi”. This process is called sāyujya that gives immediate liberation. This way of contemplating Her is more efficacious than japa and homa. Liberation is of four types: Sālokya, co-existence with the Lord in His world. Sārūpya, attaining the same form as that of the Lord. Sāmīpya, proximity as that of the Lord. Sāyujya, absorption into the Lord Himself. The first one progressively leads to the last one. But the thought process of identifying the self with the Lord (sāyujya) leads to fast track emancipation.}

113. भावनागम्या
She is to be realized through the mind. Internal worship or mental worship known as meditation is referred here. If this interpretation is correct, then it gives the same meaning as that of nāma 870 antarmuka-samārādhyā. Possibly this nāma refers to ‘Bhāvanā Upanishad’ which describes Her internal worship through Kuṇḍalinī meditation. In the advanced stages of Śrī Vidyā worship all the external rituals such as navāvarana pūja (Śrī Cakra worship) etc. cease on their own leading the sādaka to internal worship through meditation internal exploration in terms of Bhāvana Upaniṣad. This Upaniṣad emphasizes the union of knower, knowledge and the known. There is another interpretation for this nāma. It says that meditation is of two types. One is meditating with the help of mantra and another is meditating with the meaning of mantra. For example, one can meditate by reciting Pañcadaśi mantra mentally. The second type is to understand the meaning of mantra and meditating on the meaning of such mantras. The latter is considered as more powerful. Śrī Vidyā cult attaches a lot of importance to Guru and therefore one has to go by what his/her Guru says. But the transition from external rituals to internal worship (meditation) is very important, without which She can never be realized. This nāma says that She can be realised only through unstained awareness.

114. भवारण्यकुठारिका
She axes the forest of saṃsāra. Saṃsāra refers to transmigratory existence, which arises because of indulgence in worldly activities such as desire, attachment, love and affection causing bondage. Saṃsāra is compared to forest. Forest consists of many trees. If one wants to clean a forest he needs to axe each and every tree in the forest. It is not just enough to axe the trees. He has to remove the roots too; as otherwise, trees will grow from the roots again. Unless every aspect of saṃsāra is removed at the root level, the bondage is bound to rear its ugly head again causing transmigration. But She does not axe saṃsāra for all. She does it for those who address Her as Bhavānī and for those who follow the Bhāvana Upaniṣhad. It is to be understood that those who mentally worship Her in terms of Bhāvanā Upaniṣhad, alone, address Her as Bhavānī and reap the benefits.

115. भद्रप्रिया
She likes the act of benefaction. She is keen to shower Her blessings on Her devotees. Devotees are those who try to attain Her by any of the means discussed earlier. The act of benefaction is done by Her sacred feet.

116. भद्रमूर्तिः
She is an embodiment of auspiciousness (nāma 200). This is because she is also addressed as Śrī Śiva (nāma 998) which means auspiciousness. The Brahman alone is auspicious. Therefore, She is addressed here as the Brahman. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma also says maṅgalānām ca maṅgalaṃ meaning the best amongst the auspices. Her very form is auspicious.

117. भक्तसौभाग्यदायिनी
She confers prosperity on Her devotees. There is a reference to saubhāgya aṣṭagam (eight things that gives prosperity) in Agni Purāṇa. They are sugarcane, peepul tree, sprouted jīra seeds, coriander, cow’s milk (and its modifications curd, butter and ghee), everything that are yellow in colour, flowers and salt. All these indicate auspiciousness and prosperity. The next three nāma-s discuss about bhakti (devotion).

118. भक्तिप्रिया
She is fond of devotion. Śivānanda Laharī (Lahari means rise up as if in waves) (verse 61) describes devotion. “The way needle seeks magnet, the way creeper seeks tree, the way river unites with ocean and the way the mind seeks the lotus feet of Śiva are called devotion”. Sage Nārada said ‘Devotion is beyond three guṇa -s – rajas, tamas and sattva. It is beyond desire. It grows every second. It remains connected with the Brahman. It is subtle and realized out of experience. Once realized, he always remains with That.’ Śrī Rāmakṛṣṇa compares devotion to the flood that flows powerfully into the ocean in spite of the dams built to control the floods. Our mind, he continues, is not flowing but stagnant like a pond. Our mind gets stagnated towards devotion, which has to grow every second. Viveka cūḍāmaṇi (verse 31) says that “amongst things conducive to liberation, devotion alone holds the supreme place. The seeking after one’s real nature is designated as devotion. Others maintain that the inquiry into the truth of one’s own Self is devotion”. The point driven home in this nāma is that nothing prevents a true devotee in realizing Her irrespective of the hurdles. She is delighted with such devotion and such devotees. Devotees are those who worship Her through mind to seek Her within.

119. भक्तिगम्या
She can be attained only by devotion. Since She likes pure devotion in terms of the previous nāma, She can be attained by such devotion only. Upaniṣad-s explain devotion in detail. Brahma Sūtra (III.ii.24) says, “Brahman is realized in samādhi, as known from direct revelation and inference.” Cāndogya Upaniṣad (II.23.1) says “brahmasṃsthomṛtatvameti” meaning one devoted to Brahman attains immortality. Attaining immortality means Sāyujya discussed in nāma 112. This is possible only through devotion. Katha Upaniṣad (II.i.1) says “Self-created God has also created the sense organs with the inherent defect that they are by nature outgoing. This is why beings see things outside and cannot see the Self within.” Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II. i) says satyaṃ, jñānam, ananthaṃ Brahma, meaning truth, knowledge and infinite is Brahman. Patanjali in his Yoga Sūtra (I.23) says, “by devotion to Īśvarā”. Kṛṣṇa confirms this by saying (Bhagavad Gīta XVIII.55) “One can understand me by devotional service and when he is in full consciousness of me by such devotion, he can enter my kingdom”. “Only by undivided devotional service I can be understood as I am….and can thus be seen directly…” (XI.54) Lalitā Triśatī (nāma 192) says that She can be attained only by devotion. {Further reading on devotion: Brahman can be realised either through bhakti mārg (the path of devotion) or through jñāna mārg (the path of knowledge). In devotional path, the divine grace is an essential factor. While pursuing the path of knowledge, self-effort is primary. In bhakti one affirms this world, affirms himself and his life and work with a devoted remembrance of his iśta devata. Among all the disciplines of worship, bhakti is considered as Supreme. The desperate longing and intense love for Iṣṭa devata is known as bhakti. The intense search for our true nature is bhakti. The one noticeable, yet significant difference between bhakti and jñāna is the difference in the perception of the Supreme. In bhakti one perceives Iṣṭa devata and in jñāna he looks for the formless Brahman.}

120. भक्तिवश्या
She is controlled by devotion or She is attracted by devotion. vaśya means attraction or keeping under control. Śivānanda Lahari (Śivānanda Lahari is in the praise of Śiva and Saundarya Laharī is in the praise of Lalitāmbikā. Both have one hundred verses each and composed by Ādi Śaṃkara) verse 62 refers the Divine Mother as bhakthi janani meaning ‘Mother thy name is devotion’ and bhaktārbhakam rakṣati meaning that She nurses the devotee as Her child. When somebody is overwhelmed with the feeling of devotion, tears roll down his eyes, his voice gets choked and goose bumps appear. This could be followed by a body shudder. The next verse of Śivānanda Lahari refers to the story of Kannappa Nāyanār (KN). He was a great devotee of Śiva and his devotion is beyond explanation. KN used to worship Śiva in the form of a liṇga. KN does not know any rituals as prescribed by śāstrā-s. He used to offer raw meat to Śiva and Śiva also gladly accepted his offerings. One day, KN noticed blood oozing out from one of the eyes of Śiva. KN tried to arrest the oozing by trying different methods. But none of them worked. Then he thought for a moment and immediately, he took one of his own eyes and placed in the place of oozing eye of Śiva. The oozing stopped immediately. Now, the other eye of Śiva also started oozing blood. This time KN did not try any other methods. He placed his big toe on the oozing eye of Śiva as a marking, as he will not be able to see anything, as he was about to remove his another eye also. At that time, Śiva appeared before him. Such is the type of devotion which Ādi Śaṃkara refers to in his verses. The verse says ‘the one who follows KN, his (follower) footwear is used as kuśa grass (darbha) for the kalasa (a pot containing water with mango leaves and coconut on the top with a cluster of kuśa grass. When mantra-s are recited, the energy of the mantras gets transmitted to the water inside the vessel. This water is used for purification purposes and also used to purify a sādhaka and is called mantra bath. Kuśa grass or darbha is used for all purification purposes) that is used to give a Vedic bath to Śiva”. This is called devotion. True devotion is nothing but sincere love. Those who are ignorant say that Śiva and love are different. Those who are knowledgeable say that both Śiva and love are the samesays Tirumūlar, the great Tamil saint. Śrī Rāmakṛṣṇa Paramahaṃsa says that those who are the masters in Veda-s and śāstra-s say this is right and that is wrong. Assuming there are defects in the ways of worship by such devotees, God will never mind the defects as He wants only sincere devotion. He is ready to bless us, but we are not ready to get His blessings. This is because, the path followed by us is wrong. Kṛṣṇa says, (Bhagavad Gīta (IX.30) “Even if the vilest sinner worships me with exclusive devotion, he should be accounted as a saint. He is positive in his belief that there is nothing like devoted worship of God,” and Kṛṣṇa proceeds to say in the next verse “that my devotee never perishes”. Kṛṣṇa says in (XI.54), “Only by undivided devotional service can I be understood as I am” says the Lord. All the scriptures and Śrutiī-s make a clear definition of devotion. Devotion can therefore be defined “as the subject where the feelings of ardent love blossoms within, expecting nothing in return, crossing the boundaries and limitations of all the prescribed rituals and gets transformed into an object where there is a desire to stay put with that object forever”.

121. भयापहा
She dispels fear. Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II.9) says “having known the Brahman, he is not afraid of anything as there is none by his side”. He is with the Brahman who is always a witness; therefore Upaniṣad says that there is none with him. Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (I.iv.2) says, “If there is nothing else except me, where is the question of fear”. The cause of fear is the existence of a second person. The existence of second person is felt only out of ignorance. In fact, there is no second in this universe. It is only the same Supreme Self within, who prevails in everybody which is mistaken for the second. This happens out of māyā. The very recitation of Her name will dispel fear. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma nāma 935 is ‘bhāyapahā’. Saundarya Laharī (verse 4) says, “Your feet are by themselves powerful to protect those in grip of fear.” But Śaṇkarā says that cycle of birth and death afflicted with saṁsāra (bondage) is known as fear. Śaṇkarā’s interpretation of fear is also confirmed by Sage Durvāsā in his Śrī Śakti Mahimnaḥ. He says jarāṁṛuti nivāraya, praying relief from the fear of birth and death. Those who worship Her do not have the fear of birth and death. Mere recitation of Her name will dispel this fear. (Further reading on fear: Fear is the worst destroyer of spirituality. Fear is a product of mind. Not only it obstructs the spiritual path, but also it destroys the progress made. Fear not only afflicts the mind, though it is a product of the mind, it affects one’s health as well. Most of the fears are unfounded and a result of our imagination. Fears are mostly related to physical body. For example fear of an accident, fear of an unexpected fall, fear of disease or injury, fear of an enemy etc. Sometimes fear arises out of ego. Fear of hurting one’s prestige in the society, fall in status, etc are classified under this category. Basically it is important to note that fear arises out of attachment to the physical body and ego. The latter also includes finance management. There are only two possible remedies one can think of. One is to undergo the agony of fear and the other is destroying the cause of fear by visualization. When there is fear, the entire energy will be drained out. After all, everything is pre-determined by karma-s and whatever is to happen is bound to happen. If one develops positive thoughts, positive actions will manifest and if negative thoughts are nurtured, manifestation of miseries and sufferings happen. To a great extent one can eliminate fear by positive thoughts. Thoughts are always very powerful. All of us never escape the clutches of fear, but most of us encounter fear and make it powerless. There should be some cause for fear. If one is are able to destroy that cause, the effect of fear will not manifest. Let us take a simple example. If someone is pulling a car out of the garage with a fear that he might meet with some accident, his fear will manifest and cause some accident. In this situation, his thought manifests as action. On the contrary, if one thinks that he will have a safe day, the day is bound to be safe. Let us take another example. One’s superior is going to give his report on his promotion. On some earlier occasions he had misunderstandings with his superior and he did not like his attitude. Possibly he may not give a good report about him for his promotion. In this case if he meditates and infuses positive energy to his superior he can be rest assured that his superior will not give any adverse report about his, as his positive energies will induce him to make out a good report. By infusing positive energies, one can have positive results in most of the situations. Mentally one can burn the cause of fear by visualizing fire burning the cause. Practicing this type of meditation is a sure way to success. There is no need for separate place to do this meditation. One can take a minute or two, find out a place where one can get some fresh air, by closing the eyes and visualise that the cause of fear is being burnt by flames of fire. {Remember one thing always. Nobody can harm you either emotionally or physically. You are a divine soul and abundant divine energies are always around you to protect. This divine energy prevents committing evil acts and protects you from evil influences. After all what you sow is what you reap.}

122. शाम्भवी
Śiva is known as Śāṃbhu and His wife is Śāṃbhavī. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma nāma 38 is Śāṃbhavae which is interpreted as ‘the one who gives comforts to devotees’. In that way both Śiva and Lalitāmbikā give comfort to their devotees. There is a mudra called śāṁbhavi mudra which is generally used in Kuṇḍalinī meditation. Focusing both the eye balls internally towards ājña cakra and lifting the consciousness upwards, by correspondingly raising the eye balls is śāṁbhavi mudrā. There are other interpretations also. There are three types of dīkṣā-s (initiations) and one among them is śāṁbhavi dīkṣā. The other two are śākti and māntri. Worshippers of Śiva are called śambhavā-s. She is the mother of śambhavā-s. Saundarya Laharī (verse 34) says, śarīraṁ tvaṁ śambhoḥ meaning ‘You (Śaktī) are the body of Śiva. The next verse says śiva yuvāti bhāvena meaning ‘assuming the role of Śiva’s wife’. Such narrations are in plenty to affirm that She always remains as a part of Śiva, both physically and mentally. Śāṃbhavī also refers to a young girl of eight years. There is a ritual by name kanyā pūja explained in Devi Bhāgavata (III.25 and 26) about worshipping Her in the form of girls of of different ages. If such a ritual is performed as per the prescribed method, it is said that the devotee will become prosperous and wealthy.

123. शारदाराध्या
Śāradā means Sarasvatī, the Goddess of speech. She is worshiped by Sarasvatī. Śāradā could also mean Vāc Devi-s, the authors of this Sahasranāma. She is worshipped for nine days in the month of October/ November called navarātrī or śārada navarātrī, meaning nine nights. Śaktī worship is always done in the nights as per tantra śāstra. It is said that Viṣṇu is to be worshipped in the morning, Śiva in the evening and Lalitāmbikā in the night. Apart from the śārada navarātrī, there is one more navarātrī called vasanta navarātrī celebrated in the month of April/May. Possibly this nāma could mean Śāradā navarātrī. Kālikā Purāṇa says ‘Once upon a time in spring, in the ninth day you were awakened by gods. Hence you are known to the world by the name Śāradā”. This nāma means that she is worshipped by the knowledgeable (knowledge gained from Veda-s and śāstra-s).

124. शर्वाणी
Śiva has eight cosmic forms that correspond to the five basic elements (akāś, air, fire, water and earth), soul, sun and moon (Liṅga Purāṇa I.28.15-17). Bhīma form is akāś, Ugra-wind, Rudra-fire, Bhava-water, Śarva-earth, Paśupatī-soul, Īśāna-sun and Mahādeva-moon. Śarva form of Śiva represents water element and Śarva’s wife is Śarvānī. Their son is Mars, one of the nine planets referred in astrology. {Further reading on planetary propitiation: For performing remedies for the afflicted planets, one has to thoroughly study the afflicted planet/s and perform propitiation accordingly. The ill effects of the planets will not be totally eradicated by merely performing rituals or visiting certain specified temples. The day and time of the propitiating ritual to be performed is to be fixed taking into account the star lord and its sub lord. For example, in a horoscope planet Mars is afflicted, performing remedies on a Tuesday may not be correct. The appropriate day would be the day connected to the star lord or sub lord of planet Mars. Poor feeding and animal feeding are very important in eradicating the evil effects of a planet. The ideal thing would be to go to orphanages and feed them personally. Satiated hunger expressed in their faces is capable of eradicating any type of planetary afflictions. Mantra japa is another useful way to ward off the evil effects of planets. Planetary propitiation should be done in person and not through someone else. Planets are incapable of causing any afflictions to those who repose unshakable faith in God}

125. शर्मदायिनी
Śarma means happiness. She confers happiness on Her devotees. Conferring happiness is Her habit as She is the Divine Mother. Please refer nāma-s 192, 953 and 968 which convey the same meaning.

126. शाङ्करी
Wife of Śaṇkarā, a form of Śiva, is known as Śāṃkarī. Śam means happiness and karā means doer. Therefore Śaṇkarā is known to give happiness and his wife Śāṇakarī has the same quality. Śiva and Śaktī do not have any difference in qualities between them. That is why Śiva and Pārvatī are said to be father and mother of the universe.

127. श्रीकरी
Śrī means all types of prosperity. It also means wealth, happiness, beauty, attraction, auspiciousness, etc. Since She is the embodiment of all these qualities and also endows these qualities on Her devotees, She is known as Śrīkarī. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma 611 is Śrīkarā which means the giver of wealth to His devotees. In fact, there is no difference between Viṣṇu and Lalitāmbikā. Viṣṇu is also known for auspiciousness etc. There is brother- sister relationship and Viṣṇu is elder to Lalitāmbikā. Other nāma-s in this Lalitā Sahasranāma confirm this. They are 267. Govinda rūpinī, 298. Nārāyanī, 893. Viṣṇu-rūpinī, etc. Śrīkarā’s sister is Śrīkarī.

128. साध्वी
She is chaste (please refer nāma 709). When someone has huge wealth he is called Lakṣmī pati, meaning husband of Lakṣmī, Śrī Mahā Viṣṇu. Pati is generally used to refer husband of a woman. In ancient Sanskrit pati was used to mean a good sign, good fortune, prosperity, success, happiness Lakṣmī resides in the chest of Viśnu. Lalitāmbikā and Śiva are attached to each other so deeply, the one without the other cannot even carry out their duties. Saundarya Laharī (verse 96) explains this nāma. “Oh! Foremost among the chaste! How many are the poets who do not court Brahma’s wife (meaning knowledge). Who does not become the lord of Lakṣmī with only some riches? But, except Śiva nobody can attain you.” The interpreters intend to say that nobody can claim Lalitāmbikā like other Gods and Goddesses as She is beyond comparison with them. The problem in the interpretation arises with the Sanskrit word ‘pati’ which generally means husband. But there are other meanings for this word such as master, lord, owner, possessor etc. Therefore pati in this context does not mean husband but refers to a person who owns wealth or who has knowledge and wisdom, or who has mastered the art of speech. This verse is a poetic parlance. Lalitāmbikā is called as chaste because, She always remains with Śiva. She considers Śiva as pati deva which means a wife who regards her husband as divine. This is the right explanation for this nāma as She was created by Śiva and therefore She considers Śiva as Her divine husband. ‘Pati vedanaḥ’ means Śiva. Vedanaḥ means perception or knowledge and pati vedanaḥ means possessor of knowledge.

129. शरच्चन्द्रनिभानना
Her face appears like the moon in spring season. Śarad means second half of October, November and first half of December. In a natural horoscope, each rāśi represents a solar month. Two solar months make a ṛtu and six ṛtu-s make a year. During śarad ṛtu (autumn or fall season) the moon appears brighter and without blemishes. Please refer nāma 133 also.

130. शातोदरी
She has thin waist. These two nāma-s (129 and 130) are connected to Her kāmakalā form, the details of which will be discussed in kāmakalā rūpā (nāma 322) .

131. शान्तिमती
She is never harsh to Her devotees. She tolerates certain acts of Her devotees that are not considered appropriate. Śanti means peace. She appears peaceful and tolerates only certain acts of Her devotees. She too has a tolerance level. Once that level is crossed by Her devotees, She does not hesitate to initiate corrective measures. The corrective measures are carried out through Her ministers like Aśvārūdā or Vārāhi Devi-s. With this nāma, Her act of benediction ends. Nāma-s 132 to 155 discuss Her as Nirguṇa Brahman or Her formless form. Worshipping Her as Nirguṇa (without attributes or qualities) form is considered as an important aspect of worship and the result of such worship is described in nāma-s 156 to 195. It is also interesting to note that Vāc Devi-s have chosen to discuss her nirguṇa worship first and saguṇa (with attributes) worship later (196-248).

132. निराधारा
She is without support. She does not depend upon anybody. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (VII.24.1) asks “That which is infinite is immortal and that which is finite is mortal. It rests on its own power – or not even on that power (as it depends on nothing else, not even its own power). This is known as nirādhārā. Śaktī is worshipped both internally and externally; but internal worship leads to quicker realisation. External worship is further divided into two categories- Vedic and Tantric. Internal worship is also divided into two categories, one is with form and another is without form. Worshipping Her internally without attributing any form is considered to yield desired results leading to quicker realisation of the Self. The pure form of consciousness is Śaktī. Śiva Sūtra (1.1.) says caitanymātmā. This means that pure consciousness is Ātma. Only by worshipping Her, detachment from saṁsāra becomes possible, which ultimately leads to liberation.

133. निरञ्जना
Añjanā means a black paste (eye liner or collyrium) that is applied to eyes of women. Hanuman’s mother’s name is Añjanā. “Añjanā nandanaṁ vīraṁ” says a verse. When añjanā is applied to eyes, they look beautiful. Her eyes look beautiful without añjanā is the textual meaning. But añjanā also means ignorance as ignorance is always compared to darkness and knowledge to light. Nir means without. She is without ignorance. Vāc Devi-s would not have coined this nāma to mean that She is without ignorance. Ignorance and knowledge are associated with human and not with the Divine Mother as She is the embodiment of knowledge. Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (VI.19) gives answer to this argument. It Says ‘niṣkalaṁ, niṣkriyam, śāntam, niravadyaṁ, niranjanaṁ”. This means that Brahman has ‘no form, no action, no attachment, above reproach and without any blemish’. It also says niranjanaṁ which means without any blemish. Therefore it is to be inferred that Lalitāmbikā is the Brahman. This nāma says that Her formless (nirguṇa Brahman) form is without any blemishes. Please refer nāma 354 for further details. In Kuṇḍalinī meditation, when one reaches ājñā cakra, one will be able to see light. In the initial stages, this light may have some blemishes and these blemishes vanish along with the practice. This is called Her blemish less form, as Kuṇḍalinī is Her subtlest form.

134. निर्लेपा
She is without attachments. Lepā means stain or pollution which is impure. Attachment is caused by bondage and bondage is the result of karma-s. Karma-s arise out of actions. She is beyond karma-s arising out of actions. This could be interpreted in two ways. She is attached to Her devotees. Many devotees are able to manifest Her in their bodies. In such situations, She becomes one with the bodies of Her devotees. The karma-s of such devotees do not affect Her. In fact, if a devotee has such an opportunity, he is absolved of all his karma-s. This is because of the fact that the divine energy can enter into a body, provided that body is suitable in all respects (such as strength, internal and external purity) to withstand the potency of divine energy. Some ancient scriptures point out that the body of a devotee becomes pure by merely acquiring knowledge about Her. The second interpretation is in line with what Kṛṣṇa says (Bhagavad Gīta V.10) ‘One who performs duty without attachment, surrendering the result to the Supreme Lord, is unaffected by sinful action’. Kṛṣṇa also says ‘There is no work that affects me nor do I aspire for the fruits of action’ (Bhagavad Gīta IV.14). Lalitāmbikā perfectly fits this explanation. She performs Her action as directed by Her Lord Śiva, hence karma-s arising out of such actions do not affect Her. This is the case of yogi-s also. Yogi-s perform worldly duties, perform rituals, sacrifices, external worships, etc but they surrender the results unto God, either good or bad arising out of such actions. The attire does not make a yogi. Only thoughts and actions make a perfect yogi. If one acquires complete knowledge about the Brahman and remain with the Brahman, karma-s do not affect him.

135. निर्मला
Mala means dirt arising out of impure matter, where the afflicted mental state of an empirical individual is disabled by his own impurity causing attachment to actions viz saṁsāra. She is without such dirt. In the last nāma impurity arising out of mind was discussed and in this nāma impurities arising out of matter is being discussed. It is to be recalled that mind and matter is Śaktī. Mala is a sense of imperfection that leads to ignorance about the soul and hampers the free expression of the Supreme Self. This ignorance is caused by ego which is called mala or ānava-mala. This nāma says that if one gets out of attachments towards matter by dissolving his ego, knowledge is attained. Presence of mala causes avidyā (ignorance) which leads to confusion, dirt and darkness. This darkness can be dispelled by meditating on Her, thereby acquiring knowledge. It is interesting to note that all the nāma-s that talk about nirguṇa Brahman either directly or indirectly refer to meditation. {Further reading on mala: Mala is known as innate ignorance that conceals the true nature of the Self. It is mere consciousness of the supposed imperfection and limitation which is responsible for the rise of countless individual selves. It is the instrumental cause of the impurity or mala. One’s karmic account is the main cause for the level of innate ignorance. This ignorance is of two types, internal and external. One is due to the revival of old vasānā-s (impressions) and another one arises from the contact of a certain sense with a certain external object. Again intellectual ignorance is different from spiritual ignorance. Intellectual ignorance is dependent upon the connection of the individual self with the body, with which it co-exists. But, in the case of spiritual ignorance, it is independent of intellectual ignorance. It is due to this difference, liberation cannot be attained only by intellectual knowledge. Liberation can be obtained only with the combination of intellectual knowledge and spiritual knowledge.}

136. नित्या
Nitya means eternal and without changes. As nirguṇa Brahman is being discussed, one of the qualities of the Brahman is explained here. Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad (IV.v.14) describes the Brahman as “the Self is indeed immutable and indestructible”. Brahman is beyond changes and exists everywhere, omnipresent. Nitya-s are the fifteen deities representing fifteen lunar days. They are worshipped while worshipping Śrī Cakra. Each of these deities has mūla mantra and is capable of giving different siddhi-s. {Further reading on Nitya-s: Nitya is said to be the highest object of worship and the ultimate philosophical principle in kula system. The world kula stands for Śaktī. Apart from the fifteen nitya-s, sixteenth nitya is Lalitāmbikā Herself, who is also known as Mahā Tripurasundarī. Out of these nitya-s, the last three nitya-s are more concerned with internal worship. There are nine tantra-s that deal with these nitya-s. It is also said that the power of Śaktī is known as nitya.]

137. निराकरा
She is formless. Ākāra means form, figure, shape, etc. This is an important aspect of nirguṇa Brahman (nirguṇa means devoid of all qualities or properties). The qualities of the formless Brahman are being described one after another.

138. निराकुला
She is without agitation. Ākulā means confounded, confused, agitated, flurried, or disordered. Nir negates all that is meant by ākulā. This means that She is not agitated, not confused etc. She is the cause for these attributes, but She is not affected by these attributes. Though She is associated with ignorance or avidyā, still she is not agitated. She is associated with ignorance means She is the cause of avidyā. When She is in the form of māyā or illusion, She causes ignorance. Māyā prevents the sādhāka to acquire knowledge. This nāma means that even though ignorance is caused by Her, She is not agitated by this ignorance.

139. निर्गुणा
She is unconditioned with guṇa-s. Guṇa is of three types sattva, rajas and tamas. These guṇa-s are responsible for the formation of gross body and originate from prakṛtī (the source of objectivity) which is also known as māyā. Since She does not have a gross body, She is called nirguṇa. The Brahman alone is without guṇa-s, as Brahman does not have a gross form. Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (VI.11) says ‘ekah devaḥ’ God is one without a second. Though devaḥ also means luminous, here it means only the Brahman as Brahman alone is self illuminating. After identifying the Brahman, the Upaniṣad talks about the qualities of the Brahman. It says ‘without attributes and unconditioned’. All these confirm Her as the Brahman. [Further reading on guṇa-s: Guṇa can be interpreted as constituent qualities. There are three kinds of guṇa -s. They are sattva, rajas and tamas. Sattva guṇa means quality of purity and knowledge. Rajo guṇa means activity and passion. Tamo guṇa means inertia and ignorance. The Brahman is the embodiment of sattva guṇa, whereas the empirical souls are associated with more of other two guṇa-s. Prakṛtī is the primordial, unmanifested, and the most subtle metaphysical principle that has the potentiality to manifest into an enormous empirical universe. In the process of creation, the universe remains in a potential state within prakṛtī, so long as the three guṇa-s remain undisturbed. When the equilibrium of the guṇas is disturbed, prakṛtī begins to unfold Her metaphysical categories causing the process of creation.]

140. निष्कला
She is without bodily parts. This nāma is an extension of the previous one. Because of being nirguṇa, She is niṣkalā. Kalā means parts. Brahman has no parts in literal sense. Kṛṣṇa gives more clarity on these two nāma-s. He says “the living entities in this conditioned world are my eternal fragmental parts. Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with six senses that include mind” (Bhagavad Gīta X). This is beautifully explained in Vijñāna Bhairava (verse 146) thus: “Unswerving buddhi (intellect) without any image or support constitutes meditation. Concentration on an imaginative representation of the divine with bodily parts is not meditation.” This is possible only with knowledge. Brahma Sūtra also says (II.iii.43) “The individual souls are parts of the Brahman because of the mention that they are different.” The individual is a part only apparently, for the part-less Brahman can have no part in literal sense. Thus it is amply made clear that the Brahman is without form and meditation with form is not a meditation on the Brahman. Chādogya Upaniṣad (VIII.vii.1) further explains the Brahman as “free from sin, old age, death, sorrow, hunger and thirst. It is the cause of desire for truth and commitment to Truth. This Self has to be sought for and thoroughly known.”

141. शान्ता
The absence of negation is to be noticed in this nāma. Prefix niṣ or nir means negation of the quality mentioned in that nāma. For Example kalā means parts and niṣ-kalā means without parts. This nāma means that She is calm and tranquil. The saying of Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad VI.19 referred in nāma 133 is also applicable to this nāma. All these qualities of the Brahman are cited by Vāc Devi-s in this Sahasranāma. One more quality of the Brahman, the tranquillity is described here. Please remember that we are now discussing the qualities of nirguṇa Brahman (the Brahman without form and attributes). To make us understand nirguṇa Brahman better, certain qualities are negated and certain other qualities are affirmed in Upaniṣads as well as in this Sahasranāma. When one is bound by the clutches of bondage, there cannot be any tranquillity. Tranquillity is considered as an essential quality for self-realization.

142. निष्कामा
She is without desire. This is the reason for the previous nāma. When one has desires, he cannot have tranquil mind. There is no question for any desire for nirguṇa Brahman, the Absolute. Brahman cannot have any desires and this has been confirmed in earlier nāma-s. These nāma-s are in line with Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad (II.iii.6) which says ‘neti neti’ meaning not this, not this. The Upaniṣad is zeroing on the Brahman by negating many known qualities. Finally this verse says ‘satyasya satyaṃ’ meaning “The Truth of truth”. It has identified truth as one of the qualities of the Brahman. The same Upaniṣad further elucidates the Brahman (V.i). “That (the Brahman) is infinite and this (universe) is infinite. The infinite proceeds from infinite. Then, taking the infinitude of the infinite (universe), it remains as the infinite (the Brahman) alone.” The original verse goes like this: पूणमु दः पूण्नलमदम ्पूणाुत्पूणमु गदच्यते।पूणस्ु य पूणमु ादाय पूणमु ेवावलशष्यते॥ Pūrṇamadaḥ pūṇnamidam pūrṇātpūrṇamudacyate| Pūrṇasya pūrṇamādāya pūrṇamevāvaśiṣyate|| This nāma is in confirmation of Her Brahmanic status. During the course of this Sahasranāma, one can find a number of such affirmations.

143. निरुपप्लवा
She is perdurable, yet another quality of the Brahman. The same meaning is conveyed in nāma 180. There is another interpretation, which says that She produces ambrosia that spreads to the 72000 nerves in human body. This refers to Her subtlest Kuṇḍalinī form. When Kuṇḍalinī reaches sahasrāra, it produces ambrosia that drips through the throat and spreads throughout the nervous system. This nāma is split into nir (the word nir has many meanings and in this context, it means body) + upa (approaching) + plavā (dripping). This means that when Kuṇḍalinī approaches sahasrāra the ambrosia starts dripping into the body system.

144. नित्यमुक्ता
She is eternally free, another quality of the Brahman. To realise the Brahman, one has to be free from bondage.

145. निर्विकारा
She is devoid of modifications (vikāra means modification). Brahman does not change. There are two aspects of creation viz. puruṣa and prakṛtī. Puruṣa is the Supreme consciousness that is free of bondage, full of knowledge and creative power. This can be interpreted as the divine or active principles from the minute portions of which the universe was formed. If one has the power to create, he has to possess the requisite knowledge for creation. If creator does not possess sufficient knowledge, his creation goes haywire. Puruṣa is not associated with body, senses and mind. It does not undergo modification but constantly witnessing those countless modifications that happens around it. Prakṛtī is opposite of puruṣa. It is the root cause of creation and undergoes changes continuously. It is associated with three gunas. When puruṣa and prakṛtī conjoin, universe is created. Devoid of changes here mean with regard to twenty three tattva-s. They are mahat [It is a product of prakṛti. It the great principle, of buddhi, the Intellect, or the intellectual principle. According to the Sāṃkhya philosophy the second of the twenty three principles produced from prakṛti and so called as the great source of ahaṃkāra, (ego) self-consciousness and manas, the mind], ego and five tanmātra-s (sound, taste, smell, light and touch). These seven are called cause. Five organs of perception, five organs of action, five basic elements and mind make the balance sixteen. These sixteen are called action. Therefore prakṛti is made up of cause and action and puruṣa is devoid of this. But for creation both puruṣa and prakṛti are required. This points out to Śiva-Śaktī union. But, in this nāma She is addressed as puruṣa, the Brahman. Puruṣa and prakṛti are discussed in detail in later nāma-s.

146. निष्प्रपञ्चा
Prapañca means expansion, development or manifestation. She is without such attributes. Since the Brahman is ādhi (the first) and anādhi (without parentage) it does not have any control and does not require any modifications or changes. This is because the Brahman is complete or full which is called pūrṇam. Māṇḍūkya Upaniṣad (verse 7) says ‘total cessation of the world as such, the embodiment of peace (here word śāntam is used. Refer nāma 141 ‘śāntā’), the total of all that is good (word ‘śivam’ is used here), one without a second (this is because of ādhi and anādhi), the fourth state (turya state, the other three being, sleep, dream and deep sleep stages which are called jākrat, svapna, suṣupti). Think this turya as the Self and this is to be realized’. The Brahman is beyond the three stages and can be realized only in the turya or the fourth state. This state is the embodiment of peace and all that is good. These stages are discussed in detail from nāma 257. All these interpretations go to indicate the nirguṇa Brahman. This nāma means that She is without any expansion as the Brahman will never undergo changes or modifications.

147. निराश्रया
Āśraya means dependence (that to which anything is annexed or with which anything is closely connected or on which anything depends or rests). Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II.7) uses the word ‘anilayane’ meaning not resting on anything and free from modifications. She does not depend on anything. She being the Brahman does not depend upon anything and on the contrary, everything depends upon Her. This nāma more or less conveys the same meaning conveyed in nāma 132. Possibly, āśraya in this context could mean the gross body that supports the soul. Since She is beyond soul (Brahman and soul are different. Soul is called jīva), there is no question of Her gross body. Since She is devoid of gross body, it connotes that She is the Brahman. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (VIII.i.5) says, “The body may decay due to old age, but the space within (the Brahman) never decays. Nor does it perish with the death of the body. This is the real abode of the Brahman. All our desires are concentrated in it. It is the Self – free from all sins as well as from old age, death, bereavement, hunger and thirst. It is the cause of love of Truth and the cause of dedication to Truth.” This nāma says that She is not dependent on anybody.

148. नित्यशुद्धा
She is eternally pure. Impurity is associated with the gross body and the embodiment of purity is within the impure gross body. Brahman is always pure as It is not subject to changes or modifications. Impurity arises only if an object undergoes changes.

149. नित्यबुद्धा
She is eternally wise. Knowledge is gained by experience whereas being wise (jñāna) is inbuilt. Knowledge is acquired from the wise. Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad (IV.iii.30) says ‘the knower’s function of knowing can never be lost, because it is imperishable. But there is not that second thing separate from it which it can know’. The Brahman is self illuminating intelligence.

150. निरवद्या
She is inviolable and without defects. Avadhyā means incapable of being transgressed or dishonoured. Defects arise out of ignorance or ignorance is the cause of differentiating between defect and perfect. There cannot be any defect in the Brahman as it is eternally pure. Defects arise out of impurities such as desire, ego, etc.

151. निरन्तरा
Antara has many meanings such as in the middle, inside, within, among, between, on the way, by the way, near, nearly, almost, in the meantime, now and then, for some time, between, during, without, etc. She is without such divisions. Brahman will neither divide nor multiply, as He does not change. It is permanent. Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II.7) says “If he makes even a smallest discrimination from the Brahman, he is afraid of the Brahman” (discriminating self from the Brahman). Here the fear means rebirth. The point driven home is the omnipresent nature of the Brahman. The Brahman within all living beings, be it a plant, an insect, an animal or a human is the same, irrespective of the gross form. The time, distance and religion do not modify the Brahman. But it is the ignorance that make one consider Brahman as someone different from what he perceives.

152. निष्कारणा
She is without cause. Kāraṇa means that which is invariably antecedent to some product. She is beyond descendance yet another quality of the Brahman. But the universe descends from Her. Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (VI.9) says “There is none in this world who is His master or who governs Him, and here is nothing by which He can be identified. He is the cause of all. He is also the lord of the jīva (soul), who is the lord of the sense organs. No one is His creator and no one is His controller”. She is invoked in Śrī Cakra by addressing Her as kāranānanda vigrahe (कारनानन्द्द ववग्रहे).It means that She is the blissful elementary matter for manifestation of the universe. Therefore, She is the cause for the universe and there is no cause for Her.

153. निष्कलङ्का
She is without any stains. Stains arise out of sins. That is why those who do not commit sins are considered on par with God, as such persons are extremely rare to find. Īśa upaniṣad (verse 8) uses two words to describe the Brahman without stains. The first one is śuddham which means pure. The other one is apāpaviddha meaning unblemished (no race of ignorance). The Brahman is pure and unblemished. The sense of dualism is the cause for sins. These sins cause blemishes. Blemishes could be of anything viz. anger, hatred, jealousy, etc. These blemishes are responsible for not realising the Brahman within. These are called stains and She is devoid of such stains. {Further reading on sin: With ethicization, morally good or bad actions are systematically converted into religiously good or bad actions. In as much as any social morality must punish those who commit wrong and reward those who conform, so must a religious morality. Implicit in these notions of reward and punishment are such ideas as religious merit and sin. That is the consequences of the rights and wrongs for which one is being rewarded or punished can br conceptualised for present purposes of merit or sin. Sin is directly related to one’s karmic account.}

154. निरुपाधिः
She is without upādhi. Upādhi means limitations. Due to upādhi an unlimited thing appears as limited. For example, the sky or a ākaś appear as limited whereas in reality, it is infinite. Upādhi can also be explained as the imposition of a character on an object which really does not possess. For example, a hibiscus flower placed with a crystal. Crystal is colourless. Because of the red colour of the hibiscus, the crystal also appears red in colour. This is also upādhi. Upādhi is made up of upa which means near and ādhi means attributes. Ignorance is called upādhi as the effect of ignorance is reflected in the speech and actions of an ignorant person. She is without such upādhi or She is without limitations. Brahman is beyond limitation. Śiva is devoid of colour and transparent. He appears like a crystal. Śaktī is red in colour as per dhyān verses of this Sahasranāma. When She sits by the side of Śiva, He also appears to have red complexion. Gods and goddesses confuse this scene for the rising sun. This is also upādhi.

155. निरीश्वरा
Iśvara means superior or master. She does not have a superior. She is the Supreme ruler. One may argue that Śiva is above Her in hierarchy. Śiva has certain well defined acts that include creation of Śaktī out of His prakāśa form, acting as the static partner in creation but Himself not partaking in the acts of creation, sustenance and dissolution. Śiva does not interfere with Her administration (vimarśa form of Śaktī). Hence it is said that She does not have a superior. Though there are many other interpretations for these nāma-s, this book has taken into account the explanations available to qualify the Brahman. When the qualities of the Brahman are being discussed, it is inappropriate to interpret nāma-s in a way different from what they are intended for. With this nāma the description of qualities of Her nirguṇa Brahman form ends. Though the Brahman does not have qualities, one could be wondering why Vāc Devi-s mention about the qualities of the Brahman. As said earlier, for a common man, the Brahman can be qualified by negations, as the Brahman cannot be realized by sensory perceptions. Hence prefixes niṣ or nir (negation) is used in all these nāma-s (132-155 except 141). Knowledge of the Brahman starts with ‘not that’ and ends with ‘I am That’. The first that is negation and second That is affirmation. Any affirmation is possible only if one has comprehensive knowledge of the subject concerned. Nāma-s 156 to 195 discuss about the fruits of worshipping Her formless form.

156. नीरागा
Rāga means desire. She is without desire. Though this nāma and a few subsequent nāmas may appear similar to the previous group, in fact they are not so. Antaḥkaraṇa consists of four components mind, intellect, consciousness (in a manifested form in the mind) and ego. These four in no way are connected to the Atman or the Brahman. The components of antaḥkaraṇa are impediments to selfrealization. Apart from antaḥkaraṇa there are six other deterrents viz. desire, anger, jealousy, confusion, pride and envy. These six need no explanation as a mere look at these words will show how dangerous they are. These nāma-s explain the means to get disassociated from these. First, Vāc Devi-s explained the concept of the Brahman and now they proceed to explain how to realise the Brahman, a true step-by-step guidance to Self-realization.

157. रागमथनी
She destroys the desires of Her devotees. This is the first of various benefits accruing out of worshipping Her Brahman form (the formless form). Desire is the prime impediment in spiritual pursuit that keeps a person bonded to worldly attachments. Patañjali Yoga Sūtra (II.3) says, “The five pain bearing obstacles in one’s life are ignorance and its effects. The effects are egoism, attachment, aversion, clinging to life.”

158. निर्मदा
She is without pride. Mada means pride. When someone has something that others do not have, it gives rise to pride. She has everything and everything comes out of Her (hiranya garbha or the golden egg or womb. It is the matrix of the imperishable substance, the Brahman. It is said to be the luminous 'fire mist' or ethereal stuff from which the universe was formed and generally applied to Brahma. This is described in the Rig-Veda as born from a golden egg, formed out of the seed deposited in the waters when they were produced as the first modifications of the Self-existent.) There is no necessity for Her to become proud of something.

159. मदनाशिनी
She destroys pride of Her devotees. Annihilating pride is one of the preconditions for realizing the Brahman. What is followed is preached. She is without pride and She wants Her devotees also to be without pride.

160. निश्चिन्ता
She is without worries. Worries arise out of recollecting the past. Since She transcends time and space, She does not have a past. It can also be said that in spite of the responsibility of administering the universe, She is without worries because, She has intelligently delegated Her work to Her ministers like Vārahī and Śyāmalā. This can be known while worshipping Śrī Cakra through navāvaraṇa pūja. This is in confirmation of nāma 155 Nīriśvarā,

161. निरहङ्कारा
She is devoid of ego. Ego arises out of three guṇa-s viz. sattva, rajas and tamas, already discussed in nāma 139. Nirguṇa, which says that She is without these three guṇa-s. Since She does not have guṇa-s, it implies that She is devoid of ego.

162. निर्मोहा
Moha means bewilderment, perplexity, distraction, infatuation, delusion, etc all leading to follies. She is without any confusion, a product of mind. Mind is the most important factor in realising God. Only the attunement of mind to thoughtless state leads to Selfrealization. Īśa upaniṣad (verse 7) asks “when a person knows that he himself has become everything and knows oneness of things, how can he hate or love anything?” Love and hate leads to confusion. Kṛṣṇa says, (Bhagavad Gīta XIV.22-25) “One who is unwavering and undisturbed through all these reactions of the material qualities remaining neutral and transcendental, knowing that the modes alone are active; who is situated in the self and regards alike happiness and distress; who looks upon a lump of earth, a stone and a piece of gold with an equal eye…such a person is said to have transcended the modes of nature’. Such a person does not have confusion (nāma 162), ego (nāma 161) and worries (nāma 160).

163. मोहनाशिनी
She destroys such confusions in the minds of Her devotees. When a devotee is without confusion, he moves forward in the spiritual path. Īśa upaniṣad (7) says, ‘ekatvam anu pashyataḥ’ which means seeing everywhere the same thing, the Brahman. It was seen earlier that Śakthī alone is capable of taking one to the Brahman. When Śakthī, who is also called māyā moves away, leaving a person before the Brahman (Śiva) She enables him to realize the Brahman by himself. Self illuminating Brahman is realized only when illusion (māyā) is destroyed.

164. निर्ममा
She does not have self concern. If there is self concern, one identifies himself as different from the Brahman. This is called dualism and should not be pursued. If one looks at this nāma from the point of view of the first nāma Śrī Mātā, as the Supreme Mother she does not care for Herself. Her concern is only about Her children, all the living beings in this universe. From the point of view of the Brahman, self-concern is yet another quality that is being negated here. It is interesting to note that commencing from nāma 164 one nāma says that She does not have that quality and the next nāma says that She destroys such qualities in Her devotees. For example nāma 166 is niṣpāpā (without sins) and the next namā 167 is pāpa-naśinī (destroys sins of Her devotees).

165. ममताहन्त्री
She destroys selfishness of Her devotees. Self interest causes ego, one of the impediments to realization.

166. निष्पापा
She is without sins. Pāpa means sin. Sins arise out of desires. It has already been discussed that She is without desires (156 Nīrāgā). Kṛṣṇa says, (Bhagavad Gīta IV.14) “There is no work that affects me, nor do I aspire for the fruits of action.”

167. पापनाशिनी
She destroys the sins of Her devotees. Devotee is the one, who always thinks about Her not only at the time of reciting mantra-s, not only at the time of performing rituals but at all the times. For such a devotee mantra-s and rituals become meaningless. It is also presumed that Her devotees will not perform those actions that are termed as sins. If knowingly someone commits a sin, She will not come to his rescue. But why does She want to destroy the sins of Her devotees? Kṛṣṇa answers this question in Bhagavad Gīta (IV.14) “One who understands this truth (refer the previous nāma) about me, does not become entangled in the results of reactions of work (results of reactions mean karma-s. The concept of karma is based on Newton’s third law – for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction. This equal and opposite reaction is karma.).She wants Her devotees to pursue the path of liberation for which sins are impediments. How does She consume their sins? Chāndogya Upaniṣad (V.xxiv.3) says, pāpmānaḥ pradūyante, which means all sins are burnt up. The Upaniṣad further says ‘such sins are burnt like dry grass thrown into a fire’. The point driven home here is that when She is worshipped with all sincerity, the devotee gets rid of all his sins except prārabdha karma-s (the sum total of all karma-s accumulated over several past births) that have to be experienced.

168. निष्क्रोधा
She is without anger. Even at the time of total dissolution (mahāpralayā), the Brahman is without anger. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (IX.29) “none is hateful to me, none is dear to me”. This is one of the qualities of the Brahman. Brahman is like a mirror. Unless one stands before a mirror, he cannot see his image. Unless one is devoted to Her, he cannot realize Her grace. Whether one is devoted to Her or not, She is without anger.

169. क्रोधशमनी
She destroys anger of Her devotees. Anger is one of the six deterrents (desire, anger, jealousy, confusion, pride and envy) to self-realization. It is said that any worship done with anger destroys the effect of such worship. Kṛṣṇa cites the reasons for anger (Bhagavad Gīta II.63, 64) “while contemplating the objects of the senses, a person develops attachment to them and from such attachment desire develops, and from desire anger develops and from anger total dissolution arises…” This is the reason for considering sensory organs as evils. Kṛṣṇa also says that material mode of passion is responsible for all the sufferings.

170. निर्लोभा
She is without greed. She is extremely liberal with Her devotees.

171. लोभनाशिनी
She destroys greed of Her devotees. Kṛṣṇa says “There are three gates leading to the hell – desire, anger and greed. These should be given up, as they lead to the degradation of the soul” (Bhagavad Gīta. XVI.21) and hence She destroys greed of Her devotees.

172. निःसंशया
She is without doubts. Doubts arise while seeking knowledge. When She is the embodiment of knowledge, there is no question of doubts for Her.

173. संशयघ्नी
She clears doubts of Her devotees. She is capable of clarifying the doubts of wise men, as She is the embodiment of knowledge as per the previous nāma. She assumes the form of Guru as per nāma 603. gurumūrtiḥ. The one who is called as Guru should be without doubts, should clarify the doubts of his disciples instantaneously and expecting nothing in return. It is said that ‘spirituality cannot be sold’. At the same time, it is to be understood that those who seek knowledge should monetarily compensate the Guru, as he also needs money to sustain himself. But at no point of time the disciple should exceed his capacity in compensating the Guru and a real Guru will gladly accept whatever is offered by his disciples. Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (II.ii.8) explains this. “If a person can realize the Brahman, the cause and the Brahman, the effect as own Self, all the peculiarities of his character disappear and all his doubts are dispelled. One should seek a Guru who falls within the ambit of this saying.” Kṛṣṇa says (Bhagavad Gīta IV.34), “Understand the true nature of knowledge by approaching illuminated soul. If you prostrate at their feet, render them service, and question them with an open and guileless heart, those wise seers of Truth will instruct you in that knowledge.” In today’s context Gurus are known under three categories. In the first category are those who initiate mantra-s. Most of them are exponents of mantra-s, but they do not proceed beyond mantra-s. In the second category are those who teach yoga including the most fancied and the most sought after kuṇḍalinī yoga. The third category consists of true Gurus who impart knowledge of the Brahman out of their own experience. But this category is extremely rare to find. Śiva has imparted the knowledge about Guru to His consort Pārvatī through 274 verses and this teaching is known as Guru Gīta. This nāma means that there is no difference between Her and Gurus (third category, the true spiritual masters.)

174. निर्भवा
She is without origin. She is ādhi (first) and ‘anādhi’ (without parentage, having no beginning). It is generally said that Śiva is without origin, as nobody has created Him. Here, Lalitāmbikā is said to be without origin because, there is no difference between Her and Śiva. Their unified form is called as the Brahman. Kṛṣṇa says (Bhagavad Gīta XIII.12), “That supreme neither Brahma, who is the lord of beginningless entities, is said to be neither Sat (being, existing) nor Asat (unreal, non-existing). This saying of Kṛṣṇa has conceptualised the crux of all the Upaniṣads.

175. भवनाशिनी
She destroys the cycles of birth and death of Her devotees. This cycle of birth and death is called saṃsāra. This nāma means that when She is worshipped in Her formless form, one becomes free of bondages. Bondage is the cause for saṃsāra or bondage itself is saṃsāra. Kṛṣṇa says, (Bhagavad Gīta XII.6 and 7) “Those who depending exclusively on me, and surrendering all action to me, worship me constantly meditating on me with single minded devotion absolves them from the ocean of birth and death.” This also defines a true devotee. It is also said that if one performs caṇḍī homa on ninth lunar day (navami tithi) he is absolved of the afflictions of saṃsāra.

176. निर्विकल्पा
Vikalpa means false notions. It also means alternative. The idea of ‘horse having horns’ is called Vikalpa. She is without such ideas. Nir-vikalpa means devoid of name, form, class, etc. In meditative parlance, it is known as indeterminate perception or nirvikalpaka pratyakṣa and the next higher stage is called is nirvikalpa samādhi. Samādhi is a stage where the mind is stilled in conjunction with a single object. Nirvikalpa samādhi refers to a state where there is no discrimination between the subject and object. It is an awareness of identity or non-difference. vi + kalpa is vikalpa. Vi means opposition and kalpa means theory and vikalpa as a whole means opposition to the theory. Here, theory means the Brahman. Therefore this nāma says that She is the Brahman and there is no opposition to this theory of addressing Her as the Brahman. The nāma also means that anything, be it a subject or an object is inseparable from Her. Patañjali yoga Sūtra (I.9) says, “Verbal delusion follows from words having no corresponding reality.” Brahma Sūtra (III.ii.14) says “Brahman is only formless to be sure, for that is the dominant note.” Here ‘dominant note’ means the teachings of Upaniṣad-s.

177. निराबाधा
She remains undisturbed. She is not disturbed by illusions. Illusion arises out of wrongly identifying an object. For example, identifying in darkness a piece of rope as snake is illusion. This illusion causes fear, desire, etc. Since She Herself is the cause of such illusions (māyā), there is no question of any illusion for Her. Moreover, the Brahman does not have qualities such as illusions.

178. निर्भेदा
She is without differences. Possibly this difference could mean the difference between Her and Śiva. That is why, it is said that wise men do not find any difference between Śiva and Śaktī. Their unified form is known as the Brahman and there is no difference between them. The qualities of this unified form are being described in this Sahasranāma. Though all the nāma-s in this Sahasranāma addresses Lalitāmbikā, it should not be construed that they are addressed to Her in Her individual capacity. They are addressed to the Śiva-Śaktī combine. Saundarya Laharī says that neither Śiva nor Śaktī can act, without depending on each other. Kūrma Purāṇa says that the Supreme Śaktī is infinite, devoid of all differences and destroyer of all differences (described in the next nāma).

179. भेदनाशिनी
She is the destroyer of differences, in the minds of Her devotees. Difference means duality. When difference is destroyed, there is no second. The difference can be destroyed by acquiring knowledge and She provides this knowledge to Her devotees. The phala śrutī (the concluding verses, conveying the benefits of reciting this Sahasranāma) of this Sahasranāma says that there is no difference between Her and Her devotees. Authors of this Sahasranāma or any other important verses like this Sahasranāma always add a few verses after the conclusion of the main body of Sahasranāma and these verses are called phala śrutī or the concluding part. The verses in the concluding part normally prescribes how this Sahasranāma is to be recited, on which days to be recited and also indicates the benefits accruing out of such recitations. An abridged version of phala śrutī is provided at the end of this book.

180. निर्नाशा
She is indestructible. Brahman is beyond destruction. Infinity, thy name is Brahman! Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II.1) says, “satyaṁ jñānam anantaṁ brahma”, which means that Brahman is truth, knowledge and infinite.

181. मृत्युमथनी
She destroys the death of Her devotees. Mṛtyu means death. Only someone without death alone can give the boon of deathlessness. Death also means rebirth. She does not allow Her devotees to be reborn. This means that She destroys the karma-s of Her devotees. Devotee does not mean a person who performs rituals. One who is able to identify himself with Her is called a devotee and this stage can be attained only by perpetual meditation.

182. निष्क्रिया
She does not get involved in actions. She is the kinetic energy and vimarśa form of the Brahman or Śiva and as such She cannot be without action. As discussed earlier, Brahman is the combination of static and kinetic energies. It is obvious that kinetic energy is always associated with action. But, if one looks at this nāma from the angle of nirguṇa Brahman (the formless form) She does not get involved in action, as the Brahman does not get associated with actions but acts only as a witness. Secondly, only the physical body is subjected to actions and such actions may be good or bad. Depending on such actions, karma-s accrue to the soul. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (VIII.xii.1) says, that one without a physical body is not affected by good or evil actions. Karmas affect only the physical body. The Upaniṣad points out that a Self-realized person though has a gross body, he does not take cognizance of his body as he does not consider himself different from the Brahman. For such persons, their actions do not create karma-s. Kṛṣṇa explains this in Bhagavad Gīta (III.17). “He, who takes delight in the self alone and is gratified with Self, and is contended in the self, has no duty.”

183. निष्परिग्रहा
She does not get anything in return for the actions She perform. This is in conformity of interpretation of the previous nāma. This nāma says that She performs actions (creation, sustenance and dissolution). The point driven home in the previous nāma is that She does not get involved in Her actions. When She is without actions (even any one of the actions), the universe ceases to exist. For doing such actions, She does not get anything in return. The appropriate interpretation would be that She does not expect Her devotees to perform ritual worship by offering flowers, food, etc thinking that they are expressing their gratitude to Her. This nāma reiterates that ritual worship, at the most could only be a stepping stone towards Self-realization. If one is stranded here, it is obvious that he cannot reach Her.

184. निस्तुला
She is incomparable. Comparison can be only between two equals. Since She is the Supreme and does not have equals there is no question of comparing Her. Nāma 389 also refers to Her incomparability.

185. नीलचिकुरा
Nīla means indigo colour and cikurā means hair of the head or tuft of hair. She has indigo coloured hair. This meaning seems to be inappropriate here. A proper interpretation of this nāma seems to be difficult. This nāma becomes out of context, when Vāc Devi-s are narrating the benefits of worshipping Her nirguna Brahman form. At the same time, Vāc Devi-s would not have placed this nāma here without knowing its significance. Some are of the opinion that Vāc Devi-s while concentrating on the effects of worshipping Her formless form, realised like a flash, the beauty of Her hair and this could be the reason for placing the nāma here. This is also described in Lalitā Triśatī nāma 150 kacajitāmbudā. The possible interpretation could be: Ājñā cakra is associated with indigo colour (nīla). Nīla-cikura could mean the back head cakra, situated just behind ājñā cakra at the back of the head (just above medulla oblongata) that is fully covered by hair. Priests have their tuft in the back head cakra. When back head cakra is well developed, one can see anything happening in the world. It also helps in establishing cosmic commune. This cakra is considered to be highly secretive in nature. Some are of the opinion that tuft is kept here in order to prevent others from noticing this place. The area in which this cakra is located protrudes predominantly, when fully activated. Cikura also means a mountain, possibly indicating this protrusion. This cakra receives cosmic energy. In other words, by developing nīla-cikura (back head cakra), one can realize Her Self illuminating form, which is indigo in colour.

186. निरपाया
She is without destruction, the prime quality of the Brahman. Apāyā means destruction, death, annihilation.

187. निरत्यया
She does not transgress Her limits. It has already been seen that She functions as per the law of karma-s, the law of the Lord. Law of karma is enacted by Her, and She does not transgress Her own laws. She sets an example for others to follow.

188. दुर्लभा
She is difficult to attain. Though this nāma says that She is difficult to attain, it does not say that She is not attainable. She can be attained by internal search and exploration and not by external rituals. For attaining Her, one need to have dedicated and persistent practice of meditation, by which higher level of consciousness is attained, where She is realised.

189. दुर्गमा
She is not easily accessible. She can be approached only by tough sādhana or practice. Sādhana means meditating on Her Selfilluminating form. She has three forms viz. gross or physical form that is worshipped by performing external rituals. Second is Her ‘kāmakalā’ form which is subtle and Her kuṇḍalinī form which is considered to be Her subtlest form. She is not accessible by performing only external rituals. She can be accessed through tough sādhana by meditating on Her other two forms. Her worship should commence with rituals, gradually transforming into meditating Her subtlest form. When such a transformation happens in a devotee, She becomes a-durgama, meaning She is easily accessible.

190. दुर्गा
There is a reference to Durgā in Mahānārāyaṇa Upaniṣad (Durgā sūktaṃ). Durgā means dispeller of difficulties. Her Durgā form is described as fiery and radiant in nature. Those who take refuge in Her are saved by Her from their difficulties. Reciting Durgā sūktaṃ regularly eradicates miseries. The first verse of sūktaṃ, ṃrityuñjaya mantra (tryambakaṁ yajāmahe) and Gāyatrī mantra (leaving vyākṛti-s) together make 100 bīja-s (sadākṣari) and when this is recited, it is supposed to ward off all miseries. Durgā refers to Her act of protection, both physical and mental. A strong mental and physical balance is required to realize Her through inner search. Sadākṣari mantra: त्र्यमबकीं यजामहेसगग स्न्द्धीं पगस्ष्टवधनु म।् उवाुरुकलमव बन्द्धनान ्लम्रत्योमक्षगुक्षय माींरुतात॥् तत ् सववि ् वरेण्यम ्।भगो देवस्य ध मदह। गधयो यो नः प्रचोदयात ्॥ जातवदे से सनग वाम-सोम-मरात यतो ननदहानत वेदः। स नः पषदु नत दगग ाुणण ववश्व नाववे लसन्द्धगीं दरगरतात्यस्ननः॥ tryambakaṁ yajāmahe sugandhiṁ puṣṭivardhanam| urvārukamiva bandhanān mrityormukṣiya māṁrutāt|| tat savitr vareṇyam|bhargo devasya dhīmahi| dhiyo yo naḥ pracodayāt|| jātavedase sunavāma-soma-marātīyato nidahāti vedaḥ| sa naḥ parṣadati durgāṇi viśva nāveva sindhuṁ duritātyagniḥ||

191. दुःखहन्त्री
She dispels sorrows of Her devotees. Saṃsāra is the cause for sorrows. Saṃsāa means getting affected by attachments and desires. That is why Kṛṣṇa says “this is the actual freedom from all miseries arising from material contact” (Bhagavad Gīta VI.23). Saṃsāra is called ‘sāhara’ or ocean. If one plunges into this ocean, it is difficult to swim across to reach the shore. Saṃsāra should not be confused with one’s family. She dispels the sorrows of those who do not get attached to material world.

192. सुखप्रदा
She confers happiness. When sorrow is removed what remains is happiness. But, She confers eternal happiness by forbidding Her devotees from rebirth. This is considered as one of the best boons She gives to Her devotees. But She has Her own way of preferring such devotees. Such devotees should have tasted the sweetness (knowing the self is called as sweetness) and the source of sweetness (Taittirīya Upaniṣad II.7). They are ‘ānandī bhavati’ i.e., happy. Since She acts as per the law of karma-s (refer nāma 187. niratyayā), Her selection of devotees purely depends upon their sādana (practice). For such sādhaka-s alone, She confers happiness that arises out of having no future births.

193. दुष्टदूरा
She is far away from sinners. Duṣṭa means spoilt and corrupted and they do not even think about Her. They can never attain Her. This implies that they cannot have liberation.

194. दुराचारशमनी
Performing those actions that are prohibited by scriptures is called ‘dur-ācāra’. Ācāra is known as customs or traditions. These customs are of two types. The customs that are prescribed by Vedas belong to the first type. In the second category are the customs that are introduced recently, not prescribed by Veda-s. The customs that were introduced in recent times do not have significant spiritual values. A prayer done for a minute with deep devotion is much more powerful than performing expensive rituals. Veda-s never said that one should spend beyond his means to perform rituals, most of which are hyped in recent times.

195. दोषवर्जिता
She is devoid of blemishes, yet another quality of the Brahman. Blemish arises out of hatred, desire, etc. Here, blemish refers to mind and not the gross body. She does not have any blemish and this has been discussed in earlier nāma-s in this Sahasranāma. With this nāma the effects of worshipping Her formless form (nirguna Brahman) ends. Nāma-s 196 to 248 discuss about Her various forms known as saguṇa Brahman or the Brahman with attributes. Worshipping God without form is called nirguṇa worship and considered as superior. Worshipping God in various forms is called saguṇa worship. Religious faiths are based on saguṇa worship (with forms and attributes).

196. सर्वज्ञा
She is omniscient. Only the Brahman alone can be omniscient. Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (I.1.9) says “That Brahman, which is allknowing in general way and which is also all-knowing in detail whose austerity is knowledge and from that (para) Brahman comes this (apara) Brahman and also such categories as name, form and food.” The Upaniṣad specifically uses the word tapaḥ, meaning the highest form of meditation known as penance. Parā Brahman is the nirguṇa Brahman (without attributes) and aparā Brahman is saguṇa Brahman (with attributes).

197. सान्द्रकरुणा
She is compassionate. This is mainly because of being ‘the Divine Mother’. “She has more than any other, the heart of the universal Mother. For Her compassion is endless and inexhaustible; all are to Her eyes Her children and portions of the One (meaning the universal Brahman). Her rejections are only postponement; even Her punishments are a grace. But Her compassion does not blind Her wisdom or turn Her action from the course decreed (law of karma)”. These beautiful words are of Sri Aurobindo in his book ‘The Mother’.

198. समानाधिकवर्जिता
She has no equals. Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (VI. 8) says, “He has no body and no organs. No one is His equal. No one is His superior either. He possesses many powers of knowledge and powers of action.” The Upaniṣad talks about the nature of the Brahman. Arjuna addresses Kṛṣṇa like this in Bhagavad Gīta ( XI.43) “You are the Lord of incomparable might, in all the three worlds there is none else even equal to You; how then, any better?” She has all these qualities.

199. सर्वशक्तिमयी
She is the power of all śaktī-s. There are two different meanings for the word śaktī. Śaktī means power. As far as She is concerned, Her power is the divine power. She uses this divine power for Her acts of creation, sustenance and dissolution. Since Her saguṇa (form) is being discussed, it can be said that She has ministers such as Vārāhī, Śyamalā, or even Her ten forms which is popularly known as dasa mahā vidyā, who are Her śaktī-s. In this context śaktī-s mean these goddesses who function under Her control. In literal sense, She is in the form of all such goddesses, in view of the omnipresent nature of the Brahman. Since She is the embodiment of all śaktī-s, She is known as Śaktī. This is the reason for addressing Her as Sarvaśakti-mayī.

200. सर्वमङ्गला
She is the embodiment of all auspiciousness. She is addressed as Śrī Śiva in nāma 998. Śiva means auspiciousness. Since She is the source of auspiciousness, She is capable of giving the desired auspiciousness to Her devotees. The same nāma is there in ‘Lalitā Triśatī’ as nāma 124. There is a famous verse ‘sarvamṅagala māngalye śive sarvartha sādhike| śaraṇaye triyambake gouri nārayaṇi namostu te|| . (Durga saptasati 11.10, Markandeya Purāṇa Chapter 88, verse 9). The meaning for this famous verse is “Oh! Nārāyanī! The cause of creation, sustenance and dissolution; ever existing; the source of all virtues; thy form itself is made up of these virtues (excellent qualities); I worship you.”

201. सद्गतिप्रदा
She guides Her devotees in the right path to reach the right target (salvation). The target is realizing the Brahman. To realize the Brahman one needs to have higher spiritual knowledge. This knowledge is provided by Her. She can only provide the knowledge, but receiving the knowledge and act as per the knowledge gained, is in the hands of Her devotees. Sadgati is the path pursued by wise men. This is the stage where ignorance is destroyed and knowledge alone prevails. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma nāma 699. sadgatā. Kṛṣṇa explains this in Bhagavad Gīta (XVII.26). “The name of God Sat is employed in the sense of truth and goodness. And the word Sat is also used in the sense of praiseworthy act.” Liṅga Purāṇa (II.15.3) says, “The wise speak of Śiva of the form of sat (existing) and asat (non-existing).” Sat means all-pervading and is both eternal and non-eternal. It is also said that Sat and Asat refers to manifest and unmanifest.

202. सर्वेश्वरी
She is the supreme ruler of the universe and leads the beings to the Brahman as discussed in the previous nāma. Ruler is the one who is concerned about his citizens. She has no superior or equal as discussed in nāma 198. Hence She is the Supreme ruler.

203. सर्वमयी
She exists in all forms, the omnipresent nature of the Brahman. It would be appropriate to say that She exists in all the souls. Without soul, life cannot exist. As discussed earlier, soul is different from the Brahman. Coming together of soul and the Brahman is creation, sustenance and dissolution. Sarva could also mean the thirty six tattva-s or principles, discussed later in this book.

204. सर्वमन्त्रस्वरूपिणी
She is the embodiment of all mantra-s. This is one of the reasons why tantra śāstra is based on Her various forms, as mantra-s have vital role in tantric rituals. It is said that all the mantra-s are placed around the Pañcadaśī mantra, which is the centre of all mantra-s. This nāma could also be interpreted this way. There are fifty one letters in Sanskrit. All these fifty one letters are twined together in the form of a garland and worn by Her. So any mantra has to originate from these alphabets. This is the reason for addressing Her as Sarva-mantra-svarūpiṇī. This nāma and the next one are extensions of the previous nāma.

205. सर्वयन्त्रात्मिका
She is in all the yantra-s. Different gods and goddesses have different yantra-s. Yantra is normally a metallic plate made out of gold, silver or copper or a combination of these, wherein several lines are drawn to crisscross each other. The potency of a mantra is infused into a yantra by means of rituals. These yantra-s represent the respective gods. A properly consecrated yantra becomes powerful and its power increases along with the increase in the counts of mantra-s. Since She is sarva-mayī (nāma 203), She is said to be in all yantra-s.

206. सर्वतन्त्ररूपा
She is in the form of all tantra-s. There are various types of tantra-s and She is the focal point in all these tantra-s. [Further reading on tantra: Tantra are class of works teaching mystical formularies (mostly in the form of dialogues between Śiva and Śaktī and said to treat five subjects, 1. the creation, 2. the destruction of the world, 3. the worship of gods, 4. the attainment of all objects, especially of six superhuman faculties (siddhi-s) 5. the four modes of union with the Supreme Spirit by meditation. Tantra can be defined as the practice in an effort to gain access to and appropriate the energy of illuminated consciousness of the Brahman that courses through the universe, giving its creatures, life and potential salvation. Humans in particular are empowered to realise this goal through strategies of embodiment, i.e. of causing that divine energy to become concentrated in or another or sort of template , grid, or macrocosm – prior to internalisation in or identification with the individual microcosm. Tantra is generally considered as beliefs and practices which, working from the principle that the universe we experience, is nothing other than the concrete manifestation of the divine energy of the Brahman that creates and sustains that universe, seeks to ritually appropriate and channel that energy, within the human microcosm, in the creative and emancipator ways.]

207. मनोन्मनी
She is in the form of manonmanī (beyond perception). There are eight smaller cakra-s between ājñā cakra and sahasrāra and the one, just below the sahasrāra is called manonmanī. It is also known as unmani. As this cakra is closer to the sahasrāra, where She is going to conjugate with Śiva, no activity takes place in manonmanī, which is beyond time and space. This is the last point where She is known as Śaktī. In the next stage at sahasrāra She becomes Śiva-Śaktī. This point is also known as the mouth of Rudra. In Śrī Rudram, one of the forms of Śiva is called Manonmana and His wife is Manonmanī. There is a mudrā called manonmanī, which is used in advanced stages of meditation. When this mudrā is used, one almost loses his consciousness, ready to merge with the Supreme. At this state the triad of meditation, meditator and the object of meditation are dissolved to form the Supreme oneness and the flow of ambrosia is realised. Śiva is known as Manonmana. The supra mental śaktī of Paramaśiva in its primal movement towards manifestation, through inseparable from Him is known as unmanā or unmanī. This is beyond time and space and is immeasurable.

208. माहेश्वरी
Wife of Māhesvarā, a form of Śiva. Mahānārāyaṇa Upaniṣad (XII.17) says, “He is the Supreme Lord who transcends ॐ which is uttered at the commencement of the recital of the Veda-s and which is dissolved in the primal cause during contemplation.” His wife is Māheśvarī. Māheśvara form of Śiva is the Supreme form. He is beyond the three guṇas- sattva, rajas and tamas. Liṅga form of Śiva is Māhesvara form. Liṅga Purāṇa says that all the deities are present in Liṅga form of Śiva, a resemblance to Śrī Cakra.

209. महादेवी
Śiva is also known as Mahādeva, His moon form (this is said to be the eighth form of Śiva. His wife is Rohinī and their son is Budha, the planet Mercury) and his wife is Mahādevi. Maha also means the Supreme. She is the Supreme and hence called Mahādevi. Śiva has eight forms and they are – 1. Sarva – earth form, 2. Bhavawater form, 3. Rudra – fire form, 4. Ugra – wind form, 5. Bhīmawater form, 6. Paśupati – soul form, 7. Īśāna – sun form and 8. Mahādeva –moon form. These eight forms of Śiva are His cosmic forms (Liṅga Purāṇa). It is pertinent to note that both Śiva and Śaktī have moon in their crowns. Moon indicates two qualities, one is its coolness and another is intelligence.

210. महालक्ष्मी
The great (mahā) wife of Viṣṇu. Śiva manifests in the form of Viṣṇu for sustenance and His wife is Mahālakṣmī. Liṅga Purāṇa says that Mahālakṣmī is the mother of the universe. “May Lakśmī who is endowed with all attributes, who has all three characteristics, who is the goodness that bestows all and who is omnipresent, dispel my sin” is a hymn in Liṅga Purāṇa. Mahālakṣmī also means a girl of thirteen years. If Mahālakṣmī is worshipped on every 13th lunar day (trayodaśa) with Her bīja (śrīṃ- ि ीं), there will no dearth of prosperity and auspiciousness.

211. मृडप्रिया
Śiva is also known as Mṛḍan, His sattvic form. Since She likes Śiva, She is called Mṛḍapriyā. Mṛḍa means happiness, a quality of sattva guṇa, showing compassion or mercy, gracious and priyā means dear. This nāma means that Śiva caresses this universe and as His wife, She loves this act of Śiva. After all, She is the Supreme Mother.

212. महारूपा
She has a great form. It is to be observed that all these nāma-s begin with Mahā indicating Her Supreme stature. Kṛṣṇa explains this Supreme form as “The total material substance called Brahman is the source of birth and it is that Brahman that I impregnate, making possible the births of all living beings’ (Bhagavad Gīta. XIV.3). Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (I.i.9) says, “tasmadetadbrahma nāma rūpamannaṃ ca jāyate”, which means from that Brahman (parā Brahman) this Brahman (aparā) with name, form, food emerge.’ ‘She has this kind of mahat’form. This supreme mahat form is the cause for creation. Mahat means abundance. It also refers to the buddhi, or Intellect, or the intellectual principle. (according to the Sāṃkhya philosophy the second of the twenty three principles produced from Prakṛti and so called, as the great source of ahaṃkāra, 'self-consciousness' (ego), and manas, 'the mind'.)

213. महापूज्या
She is worshipped by great souls like saints and sages. Saints and sages have more knowledge than most of the demigods and goddesses. They will not worship anybody unless they are worthy of worship. There are interpretations saying that Brahma, Viṣṇu, Śiva worship Her. This means that Gods who have been assigned various duties, worship Her. This is yet another affirmation regarding Her supremacy. There are references to gods, goddesses and others who worship Her using mantra-s, metals and gems. 1.Śiva - mantra, 2. Brahmā – stone, 3. Viṣṇu - blue stone, 4. Kubera – gold, 5. Viśvedevās - silver, 6. Vāyu – copper, 7. Vasu - brass, 8. Varuna – crystal, 9. Agni – gems, 10. Śakra – pearls, 11. Sūrya – coral, 12. Soma – lapis, 13. Planets – lazuli, 14. Demons – tin, 15. Piśācas - adamantine, 16. Mātṛgaṇa-s – iron.

214. महापातकनाशिनी
She destroys great sins. There are certain rules for expiations of sins. Sins are committed knowingly and unknowingly. There is no remedy for committing a sin knowingly. The worst sin is brahmahatyā, which means murdering the one who is an exponent of Veda-s. It is said that there is no remedy for this sin. For such sins, karmic account swells and accordingly one has to undergo sufferings either in this birth itself or in subsequent births. (A study of birth chart will reveal whether a person has such karmic afflictions, based on 5th and 9th houses. Though various remedies are prescribed to eradicate such afflictions, the best remedy is to feed the deserving poor and starving animals. For brahmahatyā doṣa, it is said that there is no remedy at all.) One has to surely undergo sufferings for such sins either committed in this birth or in previous births and such sufferings cannot be mitigated by performing remedies. This nāma says that She can absolve even the worst sins of Her devotees.

215. महामाया
Māyā means illusion. She is known as mahā-māyā svarūpinī. The entire universe functions on the basis of māyā or illusion. If She does not cast Her effect of māyā on this world, there will no activity at all. Her spell of māyā makes us to seek the Brahman, Her another form, prākaśa vimarśa mahā-māyā svarūpinī. Even the sages and saints are no exception to Her spell of māyā. The intensity of māyā is felt depending upon one’s karma. The ‘hrīṁ (ह्रीं)’ bīja is called māyā bīja (please refer to the discussion on Pañcadaśī mantra). {Further reading on māyā: In advaita philosophy (non-dualism) to some thinkers the terms māyā and avidyā mean the same thing. But some advaitins differentiate them and say that māyā is an auxiliary to Īśvarā and avidyā is an auxiliary to soul. The main function of māyā is projection, projecting the Brahman in various shapes and forms. But avidyā can both obscure and project, but covering is the main function of avidyā. According to some, the substrate of avidyā is soul and according to some others, avidyā resides in the Brahman. The root of māyā is mā which means ‘to measure’. The infinite Brahman appears as if measured due to the effect of māyā. The root mā also means, leading to the ideal of illusionary appearance. The word māyā can be split into mā + yā. Then it means that which is not, but appears to be. Māyā is regarded as Śaktī, the attribute of the Brahman. Brahman is essentially without attributes and is known as nirguṇa Brahman. But viewed in relation to māyā, it is saguṇa Brahman or with attributes. Just as a magician conjures up many things by his magical power which he really does not possess, so Brahman with māyā śaktī projects the appearance of the world. As things conjured up by the magician are false, so the projected world is ultimately false. The phenomenal world is mere illusion or māyā. It is in reality nonexistent. It appears to exist only because of the external objects that are related in the self, behind the mind. It is nothing but a mere illusory projection of ātman.}

216. महासत्त्वा
Sattvā is one of the three guṇa-s, the other two being rajas and tamas. Out of the three, sattva guṇa is supreme. When this guṇa is dominant in a person, he cannot commit any sins either knowingly or unknowingly. She chooses these persons to shower on them Her special grace. Here She is referred to as an embodiment of the qualities of sattva guṇa such as understanding the reality, emitting positive energy from one’s own self, the mental and physical strength due to the positive vibrations etc.

217. महाशक्तिः
Śaktī means energy. Because of Her sattvic guṇa, She possesses supreme energy, with which She controls the universe. The universe functions only with the energy of the Brahman. For example, the gravitational force that keeps the planets in a place, thereby avoiding collision and resultant great dissolution. Therefore, She by Her supreme energy keeps this universe afloat.

218. महारतिः
She gives immense happiness and delight to Her devotees. (rati means pleasure, enjoyment, delight in, fondness for). This is possible because She has that kind of potential energy, full of happiness and delight. After all, She is the incarnation of auspiciousness. Her form, Her radiance, Her qualities, Her supreme care (being Śrī Mātā or the divine mother) all these lead to happiness when one cogitates Her sincerely. There is also another reason for this. Śiva is known for His auspiciousness. His wife is also full of auspiciousness as She is always with Him. 998th nāma of this Sahasranāma is Śrī Śiva meaning auspiciousness. Nāma 53 is Śiva.

219. महाभोगा
She is the embodiment of immeasurable happiness. All that prevails in this universe is wealth for Her, as She presides over the universe.

220. महैश्वर्या
She depicts the all pervading attribute of the Brahman, the manifestation of universe. This is called vibhūti, the supra normal splendour of the Brahman. She is the svātantryaya śakti (the power of autonomy, the Absoslute freedom, vimarśa śakti) of Śiva and She manifests the universe through this power. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (X.18, 19), “there is no limit to my magnitude. I am the universal Self seated in the heart of all beings; so I alone am the beginning and middle and also the end of all beings.” Iśvaryā means wealth, the wealth in the form of Her grace.

221. महावीर्या
There are several meanings for the word vīrya. Generally it means courage, power, lustre, dignity, energy, etc. She is the reservoir of all these qualities and She provides these qualities to Her devotees depending upon the depth of devotion.

222. महाबला
Bala means strength. She is mighty, the quality of the Brahman. But based on the explanation given in nāma 219, Her thought alone gives comforts, wealth, courage etc. Vāc Devi-s describe the qualities of the Brahman through these nāma-s. The Brahman is explained in two ways. One is by negation, saying this is not Brahman or that is not Brahman. Another is by affirmation of certain attributes like courage, auspiciousness, intellect, happiness, etc. But in reality, the Brahman is to be realized out of nothingness.

223. महाबुद्धिः
She is intelligence personified. Intelligence is another quality of the Brahman. Intelligence can be explained as knowing That which explains everything else. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (VI.1.3) says, “That teaching by which what is never heard of becomes heard, what is never thought of becomes thought, what is never known becomes known.” Such intelligence can be given only by Her and that is why She is called as mahā-buddhiḥ. {Further reading on buddhi: Buddhi is a product of mind. In the process of evolution, antaḥkaraṇa originates first. Antaḥkaraṇa works internally as against other tattva-s that work externally through senses. Antaḥkaraṇa consists of mind and its modifications. They are cittā (the individual conscience), buddhi (intellect), manas (mind) and ahaṁkār (ego). Chitta is the blemished reflection of pure consciousness. The other three, buddhi, manas and ahaṁkār are highly subtle in nature. Buddhi is also known as mahat. Mahat literally means great. It is the source of mind and ego. It is the cause of phenomenal universe. It not only helps in comprehending the material world, but also helps in establishing commune with the Brahman. Without intellect, Brahman can never be realised. Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (VI.5) says, “It is the ignorance that leads to being born again and again.” Ignorance can be conquered only by intellect.}

224. महासिद्धिः
She is the ultimate form of attainment. Siddhi means supreme felicity, bliss, beatitude, complete sanctification, final emancipation obtained through penance. There are eight important siddhi-s known as super-human powers or aśtamā sidhhi-s (aśtamā means eight). These eight sidhhi-s are aṇimā, laghimā, prāptiḥ, prākāmyam, mahimā, īśitvaṃ, vaśitvaṃ, kāmāvasāyitā. Kṛṣṇa says in Uddhava Gita (X.3) “Those who are expert in concentration and yoga call the powers eighteen in number. Eight of these are pertaining to me and the remaining ten are to a perfection of sattva. Minuteness, immensity, lightness of the body (aṇimā, laghimā, mahimā), connection of being with his organs known as attainment (prāptiḥ), capacity to derive enjoyment from everything heard or seen (prākāmyam), exerting an influence on all, known as rulership (īśitvaṃ), non-attachment to sense objects called self control (vaśitvaṃ) and consummation of any and every desire (vaśitvaṃ) are considered as my natural powers.” But these super human powers are trivial to a true devotee. Undoubtedly She confers on Her devotees who pursue the path of meditation, these aṣṭama siddhi-s. But a true devotee does not bother about these super human powers and dumps these illusionary powers with the sole aim of realizing Her.

225. महायोगेश्वरेश्वरी
She is the ruler of yoga and sought after by great yogis. Yoga is the practice by which an individual consciousness is merged with the universal consciousness. Yoga means to unite. It is the union of body, mind and Spirit. Those who have attained this state are called yogis. Such yogis seek Her benediction through meditation to stay attuned with Her.

226. महातन्त्रा
Tantra is a way of worship. She Herself is the great tantra or all tantra-s lead to Her. {Further reading on tantra: Practicing rituals strictly in accordance with the procedures laid down by Tantra śāstra-s will yield a faster effect, than following the procedures laid down by Veda śāstra-s. It cannot be said that tantric rituals are disowned by Vedas, as the Atharva Veda discusses certain rituals including usage of various herbs. Barring a few rituals, certain herbs and amulets, Atharva Veda does not discuss any elaborate tantric practice. Therefore it should not be construed that the tantric rituals have the stamp and authority of Vedas. Tantra śāstra-s have been wrongly interpreted, making others frown upon the laid down procedures. There is a lot of misconception about tantra śāstra-s. In fact the rituals laid down by tantra śāstra-s are tougher and needs immense suffering and sacrifice to achieve the desired results. The main components of tantra śāstra-s are mantra and yantra. Tantra itself is a combination of various scientific factors. For example astronomy, astrology, anatomy, study of herbs (ayurveda), geometry (for drawing yantra), etc are certain basic principles of tantra śāstra. One need to be better informed for practicing tantric rituals. The one important factor of tantric ritual is worshipping a form of Goddess as opposed to the teachings of Upaniṣad. All the tantra śāstra-s are said to have been told to Pārvatī by Her consort Śiva. Śiva himself says that in kaliyug, tantra śāstra works better than other śāstra-s. It is difficult to trace the origin of tantra śāstra- s. But it is prevalent in most of the Asian countries such as India, China, Japan, Tibet, etc. Buddhism also has mantra-s of tantric nature like Hinduism. The importance of Vedic rituals is losing ground simply because in the present times, nobody is able to follow the procedures prescribed by Veda-s as they are elaborate. Purity of mind and body is paramount in Vedic rituals as opposed to tantric rituals, though tantra also lays down its own rules for purity. Again mantra-s prescribed by Veda-s are different from the mantra-s prescribed by tantra-s. The Vedic mantra-s may not have the same potency as that of tantric mantra-s in today’s scenario. Tantra śāstra-s, even today are kept as a closely guarded secret mainly on two accounts. If procedures are properly followed, the effect of such rituals is imminent. It could be possible that certain practitioners might use this for a destructive purpose. Secondly, a person who knows all the tantric rituals do not want to share his acquired knowledge with someone else purely out of ego. The master-disciple relationship (guru-śiṣya) is the most important factor in tantra sastra. Master always chooses his disciples. Once the choice is made by the guru, the disciple is first initiated into a mantra. Guru alone decides the nature of mantra to be initiated. Most of the tantric mantra-s are about Śaktī. In fact, some call Śaktī worship itself as a tantric ritual. But in reality it is not so, as Śaktī is worshiped both by Veda-s and tantra-s. The idea behind Śaktī worship is her kinetic nature and secondly She is affectionately called as ‘Ma’ meaning mother, who is capable of fulfilling the desires of Her children. The procedure of initiation of a mantra is not a mere formality, but accompanied by a number of rituals. Each disciple will have different mantra-s. These mantra-s are to be recited for a prescribed number of times. Once this is done, other formalities follow. The difference in interpretation of tantra lies only in the so called other formalities.}

227. महामन्त्रा
She is the embodiment of all mantra-s. All mantra-s originate from the fifty one alphabets of Sanskrit. These fifty one letters are worn around Her neck in the form of a garland and all the mantra-s originate from this garland. This nāma could also mean Her Pañcadśi and ṣodaśī mantra-s, that are considered supreme amongst all mantra-s. {Further reading on mantra-s: In tantric philosophy, mantra-s play a very significant role, as tantrism attach greater significance to the powers of words (known as vāc). Vāc is predominantly identified with Śaktī. In Sanskrit, each alphabet or a compound alphabet is known as bīja and a number of bīja-s constitute a mantra. Bīja is explained as the mystical letter or syllable which forms the essential part of the mantra of any deity. Bīja is also explained as the primary cause or principle, source or origin. Bīja is like a seed. The effect of mantra-s can be compared to the manifestation of a gigantic tree from a tiny seed. Tantrism is designed in such a way that it infuses sound energy to mantra-s that manifests in whatever way it is used for. Mantra-s do not get energised by mere mundane repetition. The procedures of energising mantra-s are dealt elaborately in various tantra texts. Characteristic feature of tantra śāstra is the appropriate usage of powers of mantra-s. Every ritual used in tantra is accompanied by formation of mantra-s. The powers of mantra-s are so great that they can become fully functional, provided they are enunciated in the prescribed way. Mantra-s are the continuation of divine energy, restricted to either a particular deity or the Brahman or the Absolute, depending on the mantra-s used. For example, Pañcadaśi and ṣodaśī are capable of providing only the final liberation of the soul. They will not give siddhi-s. The choice of mantra-s is normally decided by one’s guru, depending upon on disciple’s ambition and capabilities.}

228. महायन्त्रा
Two interpretations are possible for this nāma. Mahā-yantr could mean Śrī cakrā in the midst of which She lives. Śrī cakrā is considered as the Supreme of all yantra-s, hence mahā-yantra. Secondly, Her form Itself represents Śrī cakrā. {Further reading on yantra: If tantra, mantra and yantra are made to act in unison, the results are achieved much faster. In particular, the combination of mantra and yantra is an essential requisite to attain the benefits as prayed. Yantra is nothing but a diagram, mostly containing criss crossed lines and bīja-s. A properly consecrated yantra becomes a shelter of the concerned deity and becomes a sanctified energetic source, through which the practitioner can establish cosmological contact with the concerned deity. There are various preconditions for formulating a yantra such as, materials for writing, the ink, the type of pens to be used, auspicious time, etc. The consecrated yantra should be kept secretively in a sanctified place, as these yantra-s emanate divine energy. Astrological remedies are also possible by using proper yantra-s and mantra-s.}

229. महासना
Āsana means seat. She has a great seat is the literal meaning. Her āsana is the seat of thirty six tattva-s. The third nāma already discussed about Her corporeal seat. {Further reading on 36 tattva-s or principles: 1, 2, 3, 4. antaḥkaraṇa that comprises of mind, intellect, consciousness and ego. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Organs of perception or cognitive senses (jñānedriyā-s), ear, skin, eye, tongue and nose. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Cognitive faculties or tanmātra-s, sound, touch, sight, taste and smell. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Organs of actions known as karmendriyā-s, mouth, feet, hands, organ of excretion and organ of procreation. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Action faculties, speech, movement, holding, excretion and procreation. (1 to 25 known as ātma tattva-s.) 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. Time (past, present and future), niyati (order of sequence), kalā (induces action), vidyā (induces intelligence), rāgā (desire), puruśā (soul), māyā (illusion, causing ignorance) (25 to 31 known as Vidyā tattva-s.) 32, 33, 34, 35, 36. Śuddhavidyā (induces more intelligence than action), Īśvara (induces more action than intelligence), Sadhāśiva (induces both intelligence and action in equal proportion), Śaktī (induces action), Śiva (induces pure knowledge).}

230. महायागक्रमाराध्या
Worshipping sixty four yoginī-s (demigoddesses who are assistants to Her) is called mahā-yaga and if performed according to the laid down procedures, gives immediate results. This worship falls under the category of tantra śāstra as navāvaraṇa pūja. In Śrī cakra, each of the eight āvaraṇa is presided by a yoginī. It is said that each of these yoginīs has eight deputies making sixty four yoginīs in all. Yoginī-s are explained as demigoddesses attending on Śiva and Śaktī. There is another interpretation. There are eight forms of Bhairava known as aśta Bhairava. Their consorts are known as aśta mātās. Sixty four Bhairava-s and sixty four Yogini-s are born to them. The Bhāvanopaniṣad prescribes Her mental worship. This is also called mahā-yāga. Yāga generally means fire rituals and navāvaraṇa pūja, though all fire rituals are not called yāga. Krama means going, proceeding or course. The nāma means that She is worshipped through navāvaraṇa pūja. The secretive meaning is that She is worshipped mentally as prescribed by Bhāvanopaniṣad (भावनोपननषद्) {Names of sixty four yoginī-s: (The names of yoginī-s differ from text to text.) 1. Brahmāni, 2. Candikā 3. Raudrī, 4. Gauri, 5. Indrānī, 6. Kaumāri, 7. Bhairavī, 8. Dusgā, 9. Nārasimhī, 10. Kālikā, 11. Cāmundā, 12. Śiva-dūtī, 13. Vārāhī, 14. Kauśikī, 15. Mahā-iśvari, 16. Śankari, 17. Jayanti 18. Sarva-maṇgalā, 19. Kāli, 20. Karālini, 21. Medhā, 22. Śivā, 23. Śākambari, 24. Bhīmā, 25. Śantā, 26. Bhramāri, 27. Rudrāni, 28. Ambikā, 29. Kśamā, 30. Dhātri, 31. Svahā, 32. Svadhā, 33. Parnā, 34. Mahāundarī, 35. Ghora-rūpā, 36. Mahā-kāli, 37. Bhadra-kāli, 38. Kapālini, 39. Kśemakari, 41. Candrā 42. Candrāvāli, 43. Prapancā, 44. Pralayantikā, 45. Picuvaktrā, 46. Piśāci, 47. Priyankari, 48. Bālavikarmī, 49. Bāla-pramanthani, 50. Madana-unmanthani, 51. Sarvabhūtā-damani, 52 Umā, 53. Tārā, 54. Mahā-nidrā, 55. Vijayā, 56. Jayā, 57. Śaila-putrī, 58. Zayanti, 59. Dusjayā, 60. Jayantikā, 61. Bidāli, 62. Kūśmāndī, 63. Katyāyani, 64. Mahāgauri.}

231. महाभैरवपूजिता
She is worshipped by the great Bhairava. Bhairava means, the highest reality. The word Bhairava is made up of three syllables - bha + ra + va. Bha means bharana, the act of sustenance; ra means ravana, the act of withdrawal or dissolution and va means varana, the act of creation. These three are the acts of the Brahman. Bhairava form of Śiva is considered as the Supreme form as it is the combination of His prakāśa and vimarśa forms (prakāśa is Selfilluminating and vimarśa manifests the entire universe with that Light). In other words, the Bhairava form is the united form of Śiva and Śaktī or Bhairava and Bhairavī. The entire cosmic manifestation of subjects and objects arise only from the union of Bhairava and Bhairavī, also known as Śiva-Śaktī aikya (aikya means union - nāma 999).

232. महेश्वरमहाकल्पमहाताण्डवसाक्षिणी
Śiva dances fiercely at the time of great dissolution (mahākalpa) and none was around except Lalitāmbikā, who just witnesses this terrible act of Śiva. The great dissolution means the universe ceases to exist and nothing remains except Śiva and Śaktī. The dissolution is called the fourth act of the Brahman, the other three being creation, sustenance and destruction. The difference between destruction and dissolution is noteworthy. Destruction is transmigration of a soul. The soul leaves the body to be born again. Death is only for the physical body. Dissolution or annihilation or the deluge means the death of entire physical body as well as all the souls. When dissolution happens, nothing exists. Everything dissolves into Śiva in the presence of Śaktī, who witnesses the great dissolution. In some of the texts Kālarātrī is referred to as the wife of Bhairava. Kālarātrī Devi is both a destructor and a protector. Her mantra is considered as extremely powerful and said to give immediate results (refer nāma 491 for further details on Kālarātrī).

233. महाकामेशमहिषी
The consort of Mahā Kāmeśvara is known as Mahā Kāmeśvarī. Mahiṣī means queen, the queen of Śiva. Vāc Devi-s after describing the great and terrible dissolution immediately mention about an auspicious scene, the Kāmeśvarī form of Lalitāmbikā. But who is that Kāmeśvarī? The next nāma answers this.

234. महात्रिपुरसुन्दरी
She is described as the most beautiful woman of the three worlds. The three worlds are vyāhṛti-s (bhūr, bhuvaḥ, svar) of Gāyatri mantra. The significance of the Tripurasundari form is the stage of the sādhaka where the knowledge, the knower and known are merged together to form one single entity, the Brahman. She produces all things that are in a threefold state. This is called Selfrealization.

235. चतुःषष्ट्युपचाराढ्या
She is worshipped with sixty four (chatuḥ-ṣaṣṭi) types of metaphorical expressions, which are called upacāra-s. For example offering Her scents, flowers, bangles, fanning Her, etc. Sixty four such offerings have been prescribed for Her. This nāma talks about the pūja ritual.

236. चतुःषष्टिकलामयी
She is in the form of sixty four types of arts. Kalā means art. There are sixty four types of arts in tantra śāstra-s. No concrete evidence is available to confirm or dispute these sixty four types. But these arts originate from aṣṭama siddhi (the eight super human powers). Śiva Himself declares to Pārvatī about these arts. Saundarya Laharī (verse 31) says Catuḥ-ṣaṣṭyā tantraiḥ sakalam meaning that these sixty four tantra-s constitute everything. The above referred verse says, “Having deluded the entire universe with the sixty four tantra-s, which are devoted to producing various siddhis relating to each, the Lord of jīva-s (souls) again brought into this universe, due to Your compulsion, Your mantra (Pañcadaśī), which is the sole means of achieving, by itself all the objects of human desires.” These tantras originate from the Pañcadaśī mantra and culminate in the Pañcadaśī mantra. This is evident from the fact the same Saundarya Laharī verse says ‘idam te tantram’ possibly meaning the Pañcadaśī mantra that is declared in the next verse of Saundarya Laharī. Since there is no differentiation between Her and the Pañcadaśī mantra, She is said to be in the form of all the sixty four types of tantric arts. Following are the sixty four arts: gītam, vādyam, nṛtyam, nātyam, ālekhyam, viśeṣaka-cchedyam, taṇḍula-kusuma-balivikārāḥ, puṣpāstaranam, daśana-vasanāṅgarāgāḥ, maṇi-bhūmikā-karma, śayana-racanam, udaka-vādyam, udaka-ghātaḥ, citrā_yogāḥ, mālya-granthana-vikalpāḥ, keśa-śekharāpīḍayojanam, nepathyayogāḥ, karṇa-pattra-bhaṅgāḥ, gandha-yuktiḥ, bhūṣaṇa-yojanam, indrajālam, kaucumāra-yogāḥ, hasta-lāghavam, citraśākāpūpabhakṣya-vikāra-kriyā, pānaka-rasarāgāsava-yojanam, sūcīvāpakarma, vīṇā-ḍama-ruka-sūtra-krīḍā, prahelikā, pratimā, durvacakayogāḥ, pustaka-vācanam, nāṭakākhyāyikā-darśanam, kāvya-samasyā-pūraṇam, paṭṭikā-vetrabāṇa-vikalpāḥ, tarkūkarmāṇi, takṣaṇam, vāstu-vidyā, rūpya-ratna-parīkṣā, dhātu-vādaḥ, maṇi-rāga-jñānam, ākara-jñānam, vṛkṣāyur-veda-yogāḥ, meṣakukkuṭa-lāvaka-yuddha-vidhiḥ, śuka-sārikā-pralāpanam, utsādanam, keśa-mārjana-kauśalam, akṣara-muṣṭikā-kathanam, mlechitaka-vikalpāḥ, deśa-bhāṣā-jñānam, puṣpa-śakaṭikā-nimittajñānam, yantra-mātṛkā, dhāraṇa-mātṛkā, saṃpāṭyam, mānasī_kāvya-kriyā, kriyā-vikalpāḥ, chalitakayogāḥ, abhidhānakoṣa-cchando-jñānam, vastra-gopanāni, dyūta-viśeṣaḥ, ākarṣaṇakrīḍā, bālaka-krīḍanakāni, vaināyikīnāṃ-vidyāṇāṃ-ñānam, vaijayikīnāṃ-vidyānāṃ-jñānam. However, the list varies from text to text.

237. महाचतुः-षष्टिकोटि-योगिनी-गणसेविता
Mahā-catuḥ-ṣaṣti-koṭi means sixty four crores or 640 million. Yoginī-gana are demigoddesses. She is worshipped by these 640 million demigoddesses also known as yogini-s. In Śrī Cakra, there are eight mātṛkā devi-s (also known as aṣḥta māta-s) like, Brāhmī, Māheśvarī, Kaumārī, Vaiśṇavī, Vārāhī, Indrāṇī, Cāmuṇdā, Mahālakśmī. The aṣḥta māta-s have eight deputies called as yoginis which make sixty four yogini-s. Each of these sixty four yogini-s has one crore or ten million attendant yogini-s. Thus the calculation of 640 million yogini-s is arrived. These yogini-s attend to different aspects of administration of the universe. In Śrī Cakra there are nine āvaraṇa-s (coverings or roundabouts). Each āvaraṇa is controlled by a yogini. The ninth āvaraṇa is controlled byLalitāmbikā Herself. Taking into account the other eight āvaraṇa-s, It is said that each āvaraṇa has ten million yoginis. The number sixty four should have some significance. This numeric is used in three consecutive nāma-s 235, 236 and this nāma. It is possible that the numeric sixty four refers to sixty four tattva-s. The products of five basic elements like ether, etc combined with antakaraṇa (mind, intellect, consciousness and ego) making a total of sixty four. In fact, the entire human activities are controlled by these 64 tattva-s. Please also refer nāma 230.

238. मनुविद्या
Vidya means Śrī Vidya, the ritual worship of Śrī Cakra. The base of Śrī Vidya worship is Pañcadaśī mantra. There are twelve types of Pañcadaśī mantra introduced by Manu, Kubera (the god of wealth), Chandra (moon), Lopāmudrā (wife of sage Agastya), Agastya, Manmatha (the god of love), Agni (the fire god), Surya (sun), Indra (chief of gods), Skanda (Lord Kārttikeya, son of Śiva and Pārvatī, also known as Subrahmaṇya), Śiva (Her consort) and Durvāsa. The basic mantra in all the twelve remains the same. In this Sahasranāma all these names are referred and the first of such reference is this nāma. This nāma refers to the worship done by Manu.

239. चन्द्रविद्या
After Manu, the worship by Candra is referred in this nāma. {There are fifteen main worshippers of Lalitāmbigai and each one of them worshipped Her with their own Pañcadaśī mantra-s without making any changes in the bīja-s. Hence, there are fifteen types of Pañcadaśī mantra-s. (However, different texts provide different versions. Corresponding Sanskrit alphabets for reference: Ka e ī la hrīṁ ha sa ka ha la hrīṁ sa ka la hrīṁ क ए ई ल ह्रीं ह स क ह ल ह्रीं स क ल ह्रीं 1. Viṣṇu: ha sa ka la hrīṃ, ha sa, ka ha la hrīṃ, sa ka la hrīṃ, sa ha ka la hrīṃ, sa ha ka ha la hrīṃ, sa ha sa ka la hrīṃ | 2. Śiva: ha sa ka la hrīṃ, ha sa ka ha la hrīṃ, sa ka la hrīṃ, ha sa ka la ha sa ka ha la sa ka la hrīṃ | 3. Brahma: ka e ī la hrīṃ, ha ka ha la hrīṃ, ha sa ka la hrīṃ | 4. Manu: ka ha e ī la hrīṃ, ha ka e ī la hrīṃ, sa ka e ī la hrīṃ | 5. Chandra: sa ha ka e ī la hrīṃ, ha sa ka ha e ī la hrīṃ, ha sa ka e ī la hrīṃ | 6. Kubera: ha sa ka e ī la hrīṃ, ha sa ka ha e ī la hrīṃ, sa ha ka e ī la hrīṃ | 7. Lopāmudrā: ha sa ka la hrīṃ, ha sa ka ha la hrīṃ, sa ka la hrīṃ | 8. Agastya: ka e ī la hrīṃ, ha sa ka ha la hrīṃ, sa ha sa ka la hrīṃ | 9. Nandikeśvara: sa e ī la hrīṃ, sa ha ka ha la hrīṃ, sa ka la hrīṃ | 10. Sūrya: ha sa ka la hrīṃ, sa ha ka la hrīṃ, sa ka ha la hrīṃ | 11. Skanda: ha sa ka la hrīṃ, ha sa ka sa ka la hrīṃ, sa ha ka ha la hrīṃ 12. Manmatha: ka e ī la hrīṃ, ha sa ka ha la hrīṃ, sa ka la hrīṃ | 13. Sakara: ka e ī la hrīṃ, ha ka ha la hrīṃ, sa ka ha la hrīṃ | 14. Durvāsa: ha sa ka la ha sa ka ha la sa ka la hrīṃ | 15. Yama: ka ha e ī la hrīṃ, ha la e ī la hrīṃ, sa ka e ī la hrīṃ |

240. चन्द्रमण्डलमध्यगा
Candra-maṇḍala refers to the sahasrāra. She is in the middle of the sahasrāra. In the middle of the crown cakra there is an orifice called bindu. She is in the form of this bindu. In fact, in ritual worship of Śrī Cakra, this bindu is the focal point where She is worshipped. The Candra-maṇḍala itself is Śrī Cakra. The moon has sixteen kalā-s and on the full moon day, She is said to be in the form of moon with all the sixteen kalā-s. Reciting this Sahasranāma on full moon days will bring in all auspiciousness. Śiva is said to reside in the head of agni (fire) and Śaktī is said to reside in the head of the moon and together they sustain this universe (it means that the universe is being sustained by fire and moon referring to Śiva and Śaktī.) This leads to the conclusion that Candra-maṇḍala is Śrī Cakra Itself.

241. चारुरूपा
She is the beauty incarnate. Cāru means pretty.

242. चारुहासा
Her smile is in line with Her appearance. Her smile (hāsa) is compared to the moon. Her smile is the cause of bliss experienced by Her devotees.

243. चारुचन्द्रकलाधरा
She is wearing the crescent moon in Her crown. Cāru means moon light. All the above nāma-s deal with the moon. The full moon represents supreme consciousness. If She is meditated upon on the full moon night, one will attain mantra siddhi at the earliest. On full moon days, sattvic guṇa becomes predominant.

244. चराचरजगन्नाथा
She controls both sentient and insentient things of the world. She is the cause for both static and kinetic energies. Pure static energy is Śiva and Śaktī is predominantly kinetic energy, though static energy of Śiva is also present and their union is the cause for creation. Sentient and insentient means these two energies. She administers this universe as Śiva-Śaktī.

245. चक्रराजनिकेतना
Śrī Cakra is known as Cakra rājam, the supreme of all cakra-s. She resides in this Śrī Cakra along with all Her ministers, warriors, etc. The sahasrāra is often referred as Śrī Cakra. By activating the sahasrārā, one will be able to control his physical and mental activities. This is called siddhi and often bound to be misused causing the spiritual down fall. The ministers and assistants, who are referred as yogini-s, mean different level of human consciousness. The point driven home in these nāma-s is that one has to bring the mind under his control to make significant progress in spirituality. This mind control automatically happens when kuṇḍalinī reaches sahasrāra. Practicing meditation on full moon days will enable the kuṇḍalinī to ascend to sahasrāra with ease. Not even a single nāma in this Sahasranāma is without secretive interpretation. Such meanings are not discussed openly due to various reasons and continue to remain as hidden treasures.

246. पार्वती
She is the daughter of Himavān, the king of mountains and wife of Śiva. Nāma 634 also conveys the same meaning.

247. पद्मनयना
Her eyes are compared to lotus flower. Lotus blossoms at the time of moon rise. This nāma further confirms the effect of meditating on full moon day. When Her eyes are compared to lotus flower, it also implies that Her eyes are wide open at the time of full moon. Please read this along with the notes at the end of nāma 245. Vishnu’s eyes are also compared to lotus flower.

248. पद्मरागसमप्रभा
She is compared to a special type of ruby called padmarāga which is deep red in colour. Or this could also mean that She is like a red lotus. Padma means lotus, rāga means red and prabhā means light, splendour, radiance, beautiful appearance; lights variously personified. The deeper meaning of this nāma is the description of Her subtlest kuṇḍalinī form. Kuṇḍalinī is deep red in colour at the base of the spine. When She ascends, the brightness of the red gradually decreases and at sahasrāra when She conjoins with Śiva, She almost becomes colourless. In sahasrāra, the practitioner will be in absolute bliss. With nāma 248 the discussion on Her saguṇa Brahman (with forms and attributes) form is concluded and the discussion on Her five great acts begin from nāma 249. The Brahman has five acts to do. One is the creation of the universe, second is its sustenance, the third is dissolution or death of individual lives, the fourth is called tirodhāna known as annihilation or total disappearance of the universe and the fifth is called anugraha the act of re-creation facilitated by incantations.. The nāma-s from 249 to 340 discuss on the ‘Pañca -Brahma svarūpa’ known as the five acts of the Brahman.

249. पञ्चप्रेतासनासीना
She is sitting on a throne held by five corpses. These five corpses are Brahma, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Mahādeva and Sadāśiva. Brahma looks after creation, Viṣṇu looks after sustenance, Rudra causes death, Mahādeva conceals the dissolved universe (tirodhāna) and Sadāśiva again re-creates the universe (anugraha). It is said that these five Lords cannot function without their Śaktī-s or consorts. Commentators refer to the consorts of these five Gods and without them it is said that these Gods cannot perform their duties. When they are in inert condition, they are referred as corpses. Śaktī-s here should mean the various manifestations of Lalitāmbikā. Vāc Devi-s surely would not have meant to refer other gods and goddesses in this Sahasranāma. Saundarya Laharī (verse 1) speaks about this. “Śiva becomes capable of creating the universe, only when united with Śaktī, but otherwise, He is incapable of even a stir. How then could one, who has not acquired merit (puṇya) worship you at least praise you, who is adored even by Viṣṇu, Śiva, Brahma, and others.” The nāma means that acts of these Gods cannot be carried out without Her authority. Please also read the note at the end of the next nāma.

250. पञ्चब्रह्मस्वरुपिणी
This nāma is an extension of the previous one. The previous nāma underlined the importance of Lalitāmbikā in all acts of the Brahman and this nāma asserts that She is the Brahman. If the earlier nāma is not read along with this nāma, its significance would be lost. These two nāma-s explain the cosmic creation. The Brahman has five functions to perform. They are creation, sustenance, destruction, annihilation and salvation. Each of these activities is governed by different Gods. Brahma for creation, etc has been explained in the previous nāma. These different Gods are only manifestations of the Brahman. Though one talks about various forms of gods, all these refer only to the Brahman, who does not have any form and is omnipresent. This concept is further explained in this book under different nāma-s. In fact these Gods, Goddesses, ministers, yogini-s mean different natural activities that take place in the universe. That is why Nature is called as Mother Nature and worshipped as a Goddess as acts of the Brahman are unfolded only through Nature and in the arena of Nature. The five acts of the Brahman is a cyclic process. Creation here means the creation of the universe in the broader perspective. It does not mean the birth of an individual. Sustenance also means the sustenance of the universe as a whole. The birth and death of human beings as well as billions of other species is just a trivial part of the activities that happen in the universe. The first amongst the creations are the five basic elements viz. ākāś, air, fire, water and earth. Then the modifications of these elements take place gradually, which is called evolution. Such evolution happens both in physical and subtle planes. The highest known gross form of evolution is man and the highest form of subtle evolution is his mind. The universe thus created is being administered by the Brahman Himself. In order to maintain a proper balance, creatures are allowed to shed their physical bodies. Souls make the physical bodies to function and hence soul is called kinetic energy. The souls originated from the hiraṇyagarbha or the golden egg. This is so called, as it is born from a golden egg, formed out of the seed deposited in the waters when they were produced as the first creation of the Self-existent This seed became a golden egg, resplendent as the sun, in which the Self-existent Brahma was born as Brahmā the Creator, who is therefore regarded as a manifestation of the Self-existent. This is held as the fourth act of the Brahman, tirodhāna, or the great dissolution or the act of concealment. The difference between destruction and annihilation is significant. Destruction is the death of a single organism and dissolution is the Supreme process of the Brahman, wherein He makes the entire universe to dissolve and merge unto Himself. At this stage the universe becomes non-existent. There will be no continents, no mountains, no oceans, none of the basic elements (Pañca bhūta-s) exist. Such an act of the Brahman is called mahā-pralayā. This happens when Śiva begins His mahā-pralaya tāṇḍava or the cosmic dance. When Śiva performs this dance of annihilation, He becomes terribly ferocious. While He continues His dance, the universe gradually gets dissolved unto Him. The reverse modifications take place and penultimately there exists only the five basic elements. Finally these five elements too, dissolve into Śiva. Except Śiva and Śaktī none exists at this stage. Śaktī is the lone witness to Śiva’s cosmic dance (nāma-s 232 and 571). Śaktī, is very compassionate. After all She is the divine Mother. She has the intent to re-create the universe. Since Śiva continued to be terribly aggressive, She could not even look at Him. Now Śiva and Śaktī are not united. The great dissolution takes place only if Śiva and Śaktī are separate. When they are together, Śaktī never allows Śiva to carry out the act of annihilation. When the great dissolution has commenced, Śaktī could only witness such an act and this was discussed in nāma 232. There is another nāma 571 mahā-prayala-sākṣiṇī to confirm this. Somehow She wanted Her children to exist. Towards the end of Śiva’s tāṇḍava, She started dancing (nāṭya) along with Śiva. But there was no ferocity in Her dance. On seeing Her dancing, the aggressive Śiva started returning to His auspicious form. Śiva was holding the hiraṇyagarbha or the golden egg where the dissolved universe was concealed. At the request of Śaktī, the golden egg was given back to Her by Śiva and this is called anugraha or salvation. Salvation is a stage before the commencement of the next cycle of creation. Now Śaktī takes over from Śiva and administers the universe with His power of autonomy or svātantrya śaktī. Now, it is apparent that act of the Brahman cannot happen without śaktī. Hence, it is said that without Her involvement no body including Brahma, Viṣṇu, Rrudra, Mahādeva and Sadāśiva can function. They are called ‘Pañca-Brahman-s’ meaning the five acts of the Brahman. Since She becomes the cause of these five acts She is called Pañca-brahma-svarūpiṇī. {Further reading on hiraṇyagarbha: Brahman has four distinctive states. They are avyakṭā, Iśvarā, hiraṇyagarbha also known as sūtrātma and virāṭ. The first state is avyakṭā, the unmanifest stage (nāma 398). This is also known as turya stage, beyond the three normal stages of consciousness. The next state is Iśvarā (nāma 271). This state is the cause of the universe and is associated with māyā. The third state is hiraṇyagarbha, which binds the universe together. The final state is virāṭ, transfiguration of the divine happens that is visible to our eyes. The virāṭ is also known as vaiśvānarā, meaning relating or belonging to all men, omnipresent, known or worshipped, everywhere, universal, general, common, etc.}

251. चिन्मयी
She is in the form pure consciousness. Cin here means cit. Pure consciousness is that stage of awareness, where there is no differentiation between the known, the knower and the knowledge. The absence of this triad while realising the Brahman, is pure cit (also chit) or consciousness. Please refer nāma 254 also. {Further reading on consciousness: Consciousness can be explained as an alert cognitive state in which one is aware of himself and his situation. Brahman is pure consciousness known as cit. When cit becomes reflected as cosmic conscience in the form of God, it does not lose its omniscience and omnipotence. When cit is reflected as individual conscience, it degenerates from absolute consciousness to limited individual consciousness. This is known as citta (individual conscience) and is different from cit. The cosmic conscience, the Brahman initiates macrocosmic manifestation of prakṛti while the individual conscience initiates the microcosmic manifestation. Both cit and citta set in evolutionary forces into motion. There are different levels of consciousness, the lowest being the stage of action and the highest being turya and finally turyātīta.}

252. परमानन्दा
She is the embodiment of happiness. This nāma is an extension of the previous nāma. When consciousness is pure, it leads to bliss, which is known as the supreme happiness. The stage of pure consciousness can be attained only if māyā is discarded. To discard māyā or illusion, one needs to cogitate Her all the time. This does not mean that one should stop his quotidian activities, sit in a secluded place and think about Her. The prescribed actions should continue with the clear understanding that such acts are being done on Her behalf. This is the concept of Selfrealization. When all the acts are done on Her behalf, the question of happiness or sorrow does not arise, as the results arising out of such actions are surrendered unto Her. Because one is not the doer, the karmas arising out of such actions do not accrue to him. One’s body may suffer, but not his mind. His mind treats both happiness and sorrow on the same footing. To attain this stage, one should get away from the clutches of māyā. This stage is where one feels ‘I am That’. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (VII.23) says “That which is Infinite is the source of happiness, which is to be sought after”. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (VI.20), “The mind curbed through practice becomes still in which Ātman is realised and the soul rejoices.”

253. विज्ञानघनरूपिणी
She is the essence of pure consciousness. Essence means the subtle form of consciousness. Ānanda or supreme happiness is the gross form of consciousness. This is beautifully explained in Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (II.iv.12) says, “Pure and subtle form of consciousness is like dropping a pinch of salt in water. It gets dissolved and cannot be removed from the water. A pinch of salt (subtle) makes the whole pot of water (gross) taste salty. In the same way, the Self comes out as a separate entity (separate entity means me and mine or ego) is destroyed. Then what remains is the Supreme Self alone. Once this state of oneness is attained, there is no question of even the consciousness. But how is this pure consciousness?” This Upaniṣad further says (III.iv.2) “This is your Self that is within all. Everything else (the gross body) is perishable.” There is another interpretation. Vijñāna means soul or jīva and vijñānaghana means the total sum of souls. Such sum of souls is called the hiraṇyagarbha or the golden egg (please refer nāma 232). Vijñāna can be defined as ‘the absolute freedom revealing itself in the three actions of the Brahman – creation, sustenance and dissolution. The entire manifestation consisting of subject and object is a reflection of vijñāna.” This interpretation is elaborated in Praśna Upaniṣad (V.2), which says, “sa etasmājjīvaghanāt parātparaṁ” which means He (Brahman) is superior even to hiraṇyagarbha, the sum total of all beings.”

254. ध्यानध्यातृध्येयरूपा
She is the form of a triad – the meditation, the meditator and the object of meditation. This triad leads to another triad – the knower, the known and the knowledge. Higher level of spiritual knowledge can be attained only through dhyāna or meditation. Meditation is only a process of powerful concentration. Reading books and listening to sermons are not knowledge. Knowledge is attained through internal quest and exploration. The store house of knowledge is not extraneous, but within. The store house is nothing but the Supreme Self. Please refer nāma 251 also. Patañjali Yoga Sūtra (III.2) explains this further. “Unbroken flow of that concentration in that object is called dhyāna.” Kashmiri Saivism has unique advaita philosophy known as trika, a triad formed out of Śiva, Śaktī and nara or soul.

255. धर्माधर्मविवर्जिता
She is above dharma and a-dharma. Dharma is the result of good acts and a-dharma arises out of evil acts. Accrual of sins is the result of adharma. It is argued whether an action is dharma or adharma depends upon the type of job one undertakes. For example, a hangman executing a convict is not adharma and on the other hand an ordinary citizen commits a murder amounts to adharma. Generally, dharma is what is preached by scriptures. It may also be argued that dharma and adharma are the cause arising out of the three guṇa-s. She is beyond guṇa-s; hence, these do not apply to Her. There is another interpretation for dharma, religious abstraction, causing bondage. Opposite to bondage is liberation. Bondage and liberation are only for souls and not for the Brahman, as Brahman is the embodiment of absolute purity. Here, Her Brahman form is referred. The ultimate Reality is the situation, where there is no bondage and desire. Desire to attain liberation is also bondage. If one has absolute faith in Her, he should not even aspire for anything, including liberation. She knows what to give and when. There is a difference between mukti (final liberation) and mokṣā. Liberation means that a soul will have no more re-births. But, mokṣā refers to a soul going to Heaven for sojourn to be reborn again. It is the transmigration of the soul. This means that the soul is not ripe enough for absorption into the Brahman due to its karmic account. This aspect is discussed with more details subsequently.

256. विश्वरुपा
Beginning from this nāma, next 19 nāma-s till 274 talk about the difference between the soul and the Brahman. Viśvarūpā means omnipresent. This nāma discusses the manifold nature of the Brahman. The omnipresence is the unique nature of the Brahman. The creation of the universe was discussed in nāma 250. The Brahman has different forms and shapes as the Brahman exists in every living and non-living being in this universe. In the case of non-living beings, they do not have souls and hence no action takes place on their own. There is no place in the universe, where the Brahman does not exist. The creation takes place first in the form of total darkness. From this darkness intellect arises. From intellect the ego and this ego gives rise to the modifications of the five elements which ultimately creates lives in this universe. This universe is manifested through three different factors viz. gross, subtle and casual which give rise to vaiśvānarā, hiraṇyagarbha and Īśvarā. These three exist in three stages of a human life awake, dream and deep sleep. Scriptures accept only creation, sustenance, and destruction. But tantra śāstrās talk about additional two acts of the Brahman tirodhāna and anugraha (details of these two acts are discussed in nāma-s 270 and 273. For basic information, please refer nāma-s 249 and 250) corresponding to additional two stages viz. turya and turyātīta. Turya is the transcendental stage. The consciousness transcending the turya stage becomes devoid of duality. In the next and the ultimate stage the consciousness further gets purified and merges into the Supreme Self. This state of consciousness is called turyātīta. The union of soul with the Brahman takes place here and finally gets bonded in kaivalya, the ultimate state. The journey of the soul stops here and it ceases to exist. One has to take efforts to have such a union and it does not happen automatically like the first three stages of sleep, dream and deep sleep. The vaiśvānarā, hiraṇyagarbha, and Īśvarā are the three Gods, Brahma, Viṣṇu and Rudra. They are popularly known as the lords of creation, sustenance and contraction. Generally, one is aware of the first two stages viz. awake and dream stages. In the third stage of deep sleep none is aware of what is happening around, the stage of unconsciousness. A yogi can reach the other two stages, as he knows consciously that he is Śiva himself. Śiva Sūtra (III.25) says, “Śiva-tulyo jāyate”, which means ‘that yogi becomes like Śiva.’ When his consciousness realizes the Brahman, the effects of his karmas wither from him and he reaches a stage where there is neither happiness nor sorrow. When the mind ceases to think or when the mind disassociates from the sensory organs such a stage is attained. Only in this stage, Viśvarūpa is realized. She is the Viśvarūpa, the omnipresent. In Bhagavad Gīta (XI.16), Arjuna addresses Kṛṣṇa, “Oh! Lord of the universe, I see you endowed with numerous arms, bellies, mouths and eyes and having innumerable forms extended on all sides. I see neither your beginning, nor middle and nor even your end, manifested as you are in the form of universe.” Viśvarūpā is used here to mean Kṛṣṇa’s manifestation in the form of whole universe.

257. जागरिणी
The three stages viz. awake, dream and deep sleep are now being discussed from this nāma till 263. She is in the form of waking state in the living beings. In Śiva Sūtra (I.8) says, “jñānaṁ jāgrat”. The stage of jāgrat (the stage of awake) is explained thus: ‘The knowledge obtained by consciousness by direct contact with the external objects’. Here the subject (mind) is in direct contact with the object (material world) and knowledge is derived with the help of sensory organs. In the previous nāma, She was addressed as ‘Viśvarūpa’. Her Viśvarūpa form exists in the form of jāgrat in all living beings. This and subsequent nāma-s emphasize the omnipresent nature of the Brahman.

258. स्वपन्ती
She exists in dream state too. [During dream state, REM (Rapid Eye Movement) continues to exist but at lower intensity.] The knowledge gained through external objects is transmitted to mind, causing impressions in the mind. But during dream state, these impressions manifest subconsciously as dreams. Dream is nothing but the contemplation of the mind that could not be executed, in not only this birth, but also the previous births. Dream is the store house of thoughts, accumulated over a period of time. In this state, there is no reasoning to interfere, thoughts remain only as thoughts. Thoughts do not get converted into action. Impressions on the mind remain only as impressions. Impressions revolve in mental horizon. Mind in this stage does not use sensory organs. Here the subject is not in direct contact with any objects as sensory organs are not involved. The modification of consciousness in this stage is assumed by intellect gained in the waking stage. That is why most of the dreams are around the objects that are already known to us. The transformation from gross to subtle begins at this stage. The mind does not actively participate in dream state. It remains passive and just watches the dreams as a witness. Exactly this situation is to be attained when one is awake, not getting affected by the materialistic impressions of the mind. This becomes the ultimate step for Self realisation. She is the cause for this stage.

259. तैजसात्मिका
The individual soul associated with the dream state discussed in the previous nāma is called taijasa. In the state of awake, gross body is active and in the state of dream, subtle body (sūkṣma śarīra) is active. Taijas operates through the egoistic impulses with the aid of sense faculties and vital airs. Its consciousness turned inward, enjoying exquisite dream memories. Because of its association with the subtle body, it remains associated with hiraṇyagarbha state, the aggregate of all subtle bodies. When the individual consciousness withdraws from the gross body and becomes identified with the subtle body, the waking state disappears and the dream state emerges. In this state, the consciousness remains restricted to mind, intellect, consciousness and ego (these four together are called antaḥkaraṇa). Taijasa is the word derived from tejomaya (nāma 452), which means splendour or light, shining, brilliant. She manifests in this stage.

260. सुप्ता
The third of the three known stages called ‘suṣupti’, the state of deep sleep or the state of unconsciousness. In the stage of deep sleep, one is not aware of anything around him. In this state mind also rests. No traces of the previous two stages are felt here. During this state, REM is either absent or present in lowest intensity. In this stage, casual body is also rested. She is present in this stage as well, the confirmation of Her omnipresence.

261. प्राज्ञात्मिका
She is known as prājñātmikā in the suṣupti stage, the stage of deep sleep. This is an extension of the previous nāma. Prājñā is the manifestation of individual soul in the casual body. As such, it is associated with the Brahman, the aggregate of entire casual bodies. If Brahman controls the universe, at microcosmic level, prājña controls individual existence. Vāc Devi-s after having described the three known stages, now proceed to explain the fourth state of consciousness called turya. (Further reading on the three normal stages of consciousness as elaborated in (Śiva Sūtra-s I.8, 9, 10) Jñānaṁ jāgrat ज्ञानींजाग्रत ्(sūtra 8) Svapno vikalpāḥ स्व्नो ववकल्पाः (sūtra 9) Aviveko māyāsauṣuptam अवववेको मायासौषग्तम ्(sūtra 10) Jñānaṁ means knowledge. Jāgrat refers to the state of wakefulness or the normal active stage with alert stage of consciousness (8). Svapna means dream. Vikalpāḥ refers to internal perception. External perception happens through senses and internal perception happens through mind (9). Viveka means discrimination. Aviveka means absence of discrimination. Māyā means illusion. Sauṣupta means deep sleep. Indiscrimination happens naturally in the deep sleep state or māyā (10). These three aphorisms are considered together because they refer to the successive stages of mundane level of consciousness. Every person undergoes through these three successive levels of consciousness almost daily. The first stage refers to the normal active stage of awareness, without which no action can take place. Here sensory perceptions play the lead role. Second stage is the stage where one enters the dream state, a prelude to the next stage of deep sleep. Here, mentation plays a significant role, as dreams unfold only through mind. The last of stage of normal consciousness level is deep sleep, where even the mind ceases to function. During the first stage, the mind responds to the sensory inputs (8th aphorism). Mind is extremely active during this period as it has to act on multitude of sensory stimulations it receives when a person is in active or alert cognitive state. During this state, mind and senses are interdependent. Communication between senses and mind happens in tremendous swiftness. The sensory perceptions leave lasting impressions in the mind known as thoughts that manifest as dreams in the second stage of consciousness, the dream state, as conveyed through 9th aphorism. The third state of consciousness is a sort of delusion, as during the stage of deep sleep one forgets his own inherent nature. Both his senses and mind are completely rested. The 10th aphorism compares this stage to māyā, the deceptive state. It is only due to the veil of māyā, one forgets his inherent nature. It is only māyā that makes a person slide down into fathomless bondage and desire. According Trika philosophy, māyā also is the will of Śiva, which Advaita also endorses. All the three states co-exist at all the time, but only one state is predominant. This is like three types of guṇa-s. All the three guṇa-s prevail at the same time, but only one among them is predominant. This is also the case with five basic elements, ether, air, etc. But there is a significant precept in the tenth aphorism. It says that absence of higher level of consciousness is equivalent to the state of deep sleep. To put it other way, it says that ignorance (avidyā) is nothing but the state of deep sleep, where neither mental activity nor physical activity takes place. What is being discussed in these three aphorisms is only the mundane level of consciousness. There are higher levels of consciousness turya and turyātīta that will be discussed later in this book. What is discussed above pertains to normal human beings. But, yogis are exceptions. Their level of consciousness is totally different from the consciousness level of ordinary humans. Yogis are those who are able to connect microcosm with macrocosm and remain in that position perpetually. Yogin means yoking. His concentration is always focused. Even in active state (Jāgrat), he remains connected with Śiva, the Ultimate Reality. His sensory perceptions are limited to merely maintain his gross body that merely acts a cover for Śiva within. None of the gross matters is of any interest to him. In the absence of extraneous impressions in his mind, in his dream state also, he remains united with Śiva. His internal perceptions do not undergo any significant changes to cause a dream other than Śiva. His sensory perceptions would have almost lost their intended utilities and therefore do not cause any significant impressions to dream about something else other than his own Śiva. Without any modifications, his consciousness enters the stage of samādi, in his deep sleep state. He enters the state of samādi at his own will and in fact most of the times he remains in the stage of samādi. Samādi is attained by constant practice of cessation of all mental activities, in which the mind retains only the unmanifested impressions. The difference in perceptions happens only if any alternate object is available for consideration. But he does not have an alternate matter to consider. He considers everything as Śiva. He has realised that he is not different from his own Śiva. For him the knowing, the knower and the object of knowing are not different. He has developed unbroken flow of concentration in Śiva. He enters the higher tiers of consciousness turya and turyātīta at his own will and for him the transition from one level of consciousness to another level of consciousness happens with ease. To attain this stage, his free-will would have played a preponderant role.}

262. तुर्या
This is the fourth stage of consciousness. It cannot be experienced automatically. This stage can be attained only through meditation. This stage is not related to any of the three earlier stages. In the waking stage we are associated with consciousness. In the dream stage our mind is associated with our consciousness. In the third stage of dream-less sleep, consciousness has no part to play as the mind at this stage is at rest. But in turya stage, one has to tune his mind to become unaware of consciousness. This can be attained only by practice. In this stage one is neither the Brahman nor his own self. If one is able to advance to the next stage of turyātīta, he merges with the Brahman. If he falls from turya stage, he is again bound by worldly actions and the associated miseries. She exists in the form of turiya stage. This state of consciousness is witnessing the consciousness of the other three stages (in the deep sleep, consciousness is inactive). The consciousnesses in the other three stages are subjected to modifications. In this stage, the consciousness alone remains looking up for something Superior that has not been experienced by it so far. Therefore the normal consciousness ceases to exist in this stage. Only when we talk about consciousness, we talk about subject and object. There is no subject and object and in fact nothing exists. This stage of ‘nothing exists’ leads to the transformation of awareness. This can possibly be interpreted as a seed ready to sprout. The transformed consciousness leads to the single pointed or focused consciousness to know about the Brahman or even ready to merge with it. The final stage is yet to be reached in this state. (Further reading on turya as enumerated in Śiva Sūtra (I.7): Jāgratsvapnasuṣuptabhede turyābhogasambhavaḥ. जाग्रत्स्व्नसगष्गतभेदेतगयाुभोगसमभवः (sūtra I.7) There are three stages of consciousness, jāgrat, (normal active stage, or stage of awakening) svapna (dream stage) and suṣupti (deep sleep stage). These three stages are the normal level consciousness of a man. Bheda means difference. Beyond these three levels of normal consciousness, there are two more levels of consciousness. Out of these two, this sūtrā discusses about the fourth level of consciousness known as turya. Ābhoga (आभोग) means ecstatic stage (abhoga अभोग means non-enjoyment). Sambhavaḥ means existing. This sūtra says that even during the first three stages of consciousness, the fourth stage of consciousness, the ecstatic turya exists. When spiritual transformation happens in a person, there is a meeting point between the material awareness and the spiritual awareness. Beginning from that point, when the upward movement in the spiritual path really begins, one’s ego begins to dissolve. When ego begins to fade away, it leads to universal attitude of the soul, when the knowledge of the omnipresent nature of the Brahman begins to unfold. This is what is to be precisely practiced in meditation. The fourth stage of consciousness continues to prevail in the other three mundane stages of consciousness, as one is bound by ajñāna (ignorance) and consequent egotism. When ego begins to get dissolved, the spell of ajñāna also begins to fade away, paving the way for the realisation of the Self. This transformation happens in the stage of turya. Turya state is un-inferable, inconceivable and indefinable where manifold sensory perceptions paves way for the realisation of the Śiva. Māṇḍūkya Upaniṣad (7) says, “Turya is not conscious what is happening within. It is also not conscious of what is happening externally. It is not conscious of anything in between. It is also not a mass of consciousness. It is not conscious of all objects simultaneously; it is not unconscious either. It is invisible, not susceptible to any kind of usage, not within the reach of any organ of action or perception or thought. In it there is only consciousness of the Self and there is a total cessation of materialism as such. It is the embodiment of peace and all that is good. It is one without a second. “ The fourth state of consciousness is always present in all the men as a witness to all the three mundane levels of consciousness. This is in contrast to the first three level of consciousness that prevails one at a time. When one is awake, he cannot sleep, when one is dreaming he cannot be awake and when one is in the state of deep sleep, he can neither be awake nor dream. But, turya is present in the first three states of consciousness, sheathed by māyā, thereby making it unrealizable. This can be realised only in the advanced stages of meditation. Preliminary stages of meditation merely formulate groundwork and lay proper foundation for the realisation of Śiva. If the foundational consciousness is weak, the most powerful Śiva cannot manifest. When proper preparatory work is completed, turya takes over the consciousness, and the emancipation happens thereafter. It does not mean that his body ceases to exist (death), but his consciousness is purified by his preparatory work, making it easier for turya to take complete control of his consciousness. He still experiences the first three stages of consciousness, the exception being that the quality of his consciousness has undergone complete transformation, moving closer and closer to Śiva, awaiting the final realisation of Śiva at anytime.}

263. सर्वावस्थाविवर्जिता
Previous nāma-s confirmed Her existence in all the four stages. Now it is said that She is beyond these stages, again the quality of the Brahman. Since, She being the Brahman, is merely witnessing these four stages by residing within us and She does not associate Herself with these stages. This is because the Brahman has no attributes and forms. In the earlier four stages, there existed consciousness. Turyātīta is the fifth stage, where there is no consciousness at all. This stage is beyond consciousness. When this stage is reached, there is no question of return to the lower four stages. Unless one experiences turya stage for some time, this fifth stage cannot be attained. The dictum that, practice alone makes a man perfect, is the best fit here. Here there is no duality. ‘Sarvam Īśvara mayam jagat’ meaning everything is Īśvara or the Brahman. He becomes Śiva Himself. He will not make prayers, he will not perform japa, he will not go to places of worship, and he will not perform rituals. Whatever he does, he knows it is done for Śiva only. When he eats, Śiva eats. When he bathes, Śiva also takes bath. No duality, no māyā, no discrimination. He will not wear a red or white robe. He will dress like anyone else. He walks and talks like us. It is extremely difficult to recognize him as Śiva. As Śiva exists everywhere, this yogi also coexists one amongst us. This stage is beyond all the other four stages and She exists in this stage too. Here Śiva also means Śaktī. Śiva Sūtra-s (III. 27, 28 and 29) enumerate the qualities of a person who has reached this stage. He is always of full of Supreme I consciousness and feels ‘I am the highest Ātma and I am Śiva.’ He realises that knowledge of the Self is the gift that he disseminates. He has attained mastery over śaktī-s (meaning powers), and becomes an instrument of knowledge and wisdom. Sage Patañjali underlines the importance of purity of mind in his Yoga Sūtra-s. He says (I.47), “The concentration without discrimination being purified citta becomes firmly fixed.” The pure form of consciousness is known as dhyātmprasādaḥ. In the next aphorism (I.48), he says, “the knowledge in That is called filled with Truth.” This is the stage without ego. This is called Truth because there is nothing beyond this point. She is present in this stage also. These nāma-s repeatedly affirm Her Supreme status. The singular fact that is to be remembered is that Śiva and Śaktī do not have any ideological differences and the one without the other becomes inert. Their conjugation causes creation. This is discussed in the next nāma.

264. सृष्टिकर्त्री
Beginning this nāma, till 274 the five actions of the Brahman are being discussed. Earlier the five stages of consciousness were discussed. Now the five acts of the Brahman are being described. Vāc Devi-s have formulated this Sahasranāma in such a way that it talks about every aspect the Supreme Brahman (saguṇa and nirguṇa forms of Brahman). If one could understand impartations of all the nāma-s of this Sahasranāma, it tantamount to knowing all the Upaniṣad-s. Bhagavad Gīta is yet another treasure in Selfrealization. In this nāma, the creative aspect (sṛṣṭi) of the Brahman is referred. The creation happens out of Her tamo guṇa. The three main acts of the Brahman viz. creation, sustenance and dissolution are represented by three forms of God viz. Brahma, Viṣṇu and Rudra. Saundarya Laharī (verse 24) talks about the three acts of the Brahman. “Brahma creates this universe. Viṣṇu sustains it and Rudra dissolves it. Annihilating them, Īśvara conceals Himslef as well. Sadāśiva approves of them pursuant of your command conveyed through your creeper-like (a symbolic description of Her eye-brows) eye-brows moved for a moment.” {Further reading on guṇa-s: There are three types of guṇa-s. Guṇas mean qualities or attributes, which form the inherent nature of prakṛti. The three guṇa-s are sattvic or sattva, rajas or rajo and tamas or tamo. In each of these guṇa-s, the other two guṇa-s are also present. Sattva guṇa is where quality and purity of knowledge attains the highest level, with the least presence of other two guṇa-s. This is where spiritual growth begins to bloom. Rajo guṇa is predominant when action and passion are predominant. It is associated with earthly plane and mundane knowledge. It involves higher passions with worldly pursuits. This is where goals are set and in order to achieve the set goals, attachment, self-conceit, arrogance, unjustness, contempt, slander and consequent sorrow and miseries are felt. This is the stage where major portion of the karmic account builds up. Tamo guṇa is inertia and ignorance. This is associated with much lower planes than earth. Illusion and ignorance are predominant here. Sluggishness, infatuation, confusion, stupidity, aversion, recklessness, vulgarity, grief, pain, anxiety, hatred, violence are some of the predominant qualities of this guṇa.}

265. ब्रह्मरूपा
She is in the form of the God of creation Brahma. Brahma has four heads. The four heads could mean the components of antaḥkaraṇa mind, intellect, consciousness and ego. Without these four, creation is not possible. There are many stories about Brahma’s four heads. He had five heads, possibly meaning the five elements or five prāṇa-s (prāṇa, apāna, vyāna, samāna and udāna) that are needed for creation. The fifth head was cut off by Śiva for having shown disrespect to Him. There is yet another story, which says that Brahma had split his body horizontally into two, a male and a female form (different from ardhanārīśvara form of Śiva where Śiva’s body is dissevered vertically, the other half occupied by Śaktī). Brahma is said to be the great-grandfather, Viṣṇu the grandfather and Śiva the father of this universe. (Further reading on the process of creation (in brief): The soul, which is also known as puruṣa can manifest only if interacts with prakṛti, which is also known as Nature, the creative selfunfoldment. When the soul gets associated with prakṛti, the latter unfolds first into subtle non-materialistic form and later into gross form. When gross form is formed, it gives rise to three types of bodies called gross (sthūla), subtle (sūkṣma) and cause (kāraṇa). Gross is the outer body, subtle and cause are the inner bodies. Until a soul is liberated, subtle and cause bodies continue their association with the soul. Only the gross body is perishable. The imperceptible impressions of many lives become embedded in these bodies, thereby causing predominance of certain qualities in the mind in each rebirth. They are the seeds of karmas that are embedded in a soul.}

266. गोप्त्री
She is the protector, sustaining this universe. Protection is the second act of the Brahman. Protection is Her sattva guṇa. Light and harmony are the qualities of sattva guṇa. She not only protects but also nurtures this universe. After all, She is the Divine Mother Śrī Mātā. Protecting and nurturing are the instinctive duties of a mother.

267. गोविन्दरूपिणी
Govinda is Viṣṇu. Viṣṇu is the protector of this universe. When one needs health, wealth and prosperity one has to worship Viṣṇu. Viṣṇu should not be worshipped alone to get material prosperity and should be worshipped along with His consort Lakṣmī and this form is known as Lakṣmī Nārāyana. This form is considered as the most auspicious form. If one needs to get rid of some difficulties, one has to pray Lakṣmī Nārāyaṇa form of Viṣṇu. Narasiṃha, also known as Nārasiṃha form of Viṣṇu is considered as the only terrible form; otherwise Viṣṇu is considered as the most auspicious God. Viṣṇu is known through Veda-s and Upaniṣads. Go (गो) means vāc or words. Since the qualities of Viṣṇu cannot be described by words He is called Govinda. Go also means earth. Since He sustains the earth, He is called Govinda. When the great dissolution took place (refer nāma 232), Viṣṇu lifted and saved the earth (earth is only a part of the universe) from water that prevailed everywhere. Because He saved the earth, He is called Govinda. In Viṣṇu Sahasranāma the nāma ‘Govinda’ appears twice viz. nāma-s 187 and 539. (Such repetitions are not found in Lalitā Sahasranāma, which is its unique feature.) {Further reading on Viṣṇu: Viṣṇu (ववष्ण)ग administers the universe, which has seven worlds. These seven worlds are the seven vyāhṛti-s of Gāyatri mantra. In reality, these worlds represent the seven mental planes of human consciousness, from macro level to micro level. The lower and gross level of consciousness is the lowest world and the highest micro level of consciousness is called the upper world. Possibly, the seven worlds could refer to the six cakras and sahasrāra. Unless the level of consciousness undergoes modifications, refinement and purity, Self-realization is not possible. Viṣṇu administers this universe based on the “Law of Karma”. He cannot and will not bypass this law even by a fraction of an inch. The worlds that He administers have different predominant aspects. For example, in earth matter is predominant. The higher planes have life energies, emotional energies, and mental energies. The level of energies that prevails in these seven worlds becomes subtle and refined from the gross level (association with matter) as one traverses these worlds towards the highest. Viṣṇu is known for His sayana or the yogic sleep. This famous posture means that all pervading Viṣṇu rests on the blissful ocean of eternal existence. Viṣṇu means all pervading. Sri Aurobindo says “Viṣṇu paces out the vast framework of the inner worlds in which our soulaction takes place. It is by Him and with Him that we raise into His highest seats where we find waiting for us the Friend, the Beloved and Beatific (bestowing celestial Joy) Godhead”. This celestial joy is known as bliss. She is in the form of Govinda (Viṣṇu).

268. संहारिणी
She causes destruction. Destruction is different from dissolution. The difference between destruction and dissolution is significant. Destruction is the death of a single organism and dissolution is the Supreme process of the Brahman, wherein He makes the entire universe to dissolve and merge unto Himself (nāma 270). This nāma refers to the death of gross bodies and She as the administrator of the universe also causes death.

269. रुद्ररूपा
She is in the form of Rudra, while causing death. Her form is known as Rudra when She causes the death of individual lives. Rudra does not mean the lord of death. Rudra is the destroyer of miseries. Ru refers to pains arising out of miseries arising out of improper usage of sensory organs and dra means to disperse. Rudra means driving away miseries. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (III.13.3) says, “Rudra-s are connected with religious rites. The prāṇa-s are called Rudra-s because they make everyone in this world cry.” {Further reading on Rudra: The subtle form Rudra is the cosmic energy that is capable of destroying evil energies. The gross form of Rudra is a form of Śiva. He is known for perfect discipline. He destroys anything that obstructs the path of perfection. But for sure He is compassionate and merciful. The literal meaning of Rudra is moving around crying. As a matter of fact the cry of Rudra is the creation. Rudra also means the prāna or the life force (Chāndogya Upaniṣad III.16.3). When a child is born, it starts crying, only when it inhales prāṇa or the first breath. This is the exact time of birth of a child that should be noted for casting birth charts. Often, reference is made to eleven Rudra-s and they are called ekādaśa Rudra-s. They are in fact created from the Ardhanārīśvara form of Śiva and Śaktī (male-female combined form divided vertically). It is also said that Rudra was born out the third eye of Brahma, the lord of creation. Rudra is responsible for the union of individual soul with the Supreme soul by means of OM. Probably this is the reason why Rudra is called as the lord of death. The famous ‘tryambaka mantra’ of Śrī Rudram in Yajur Veda and Rig Veda conveys the following meaning. “Oh! The Lord of three worlds, bestower of grace, provider of fullness and strength, may I be detached from the bondage of death like a ripe cucumber (A ripe cucumber bursts and comes off from the plant automatically. There is no need for plucking) from shell, but not from immortality”. Shell means the physical body and seeds and pulp of the cucumber is compared to the soul. The verse seeks Rudra’s grace to prevent a pre-mature death. Immortality is not sought and cannot be sought also. This goes to prove that Rudra is not the lord of death.}

270. तिरोधानकरी
She causes annihilation and makes the universe disappear. Tirodhāna is the fourth act of the Brahman, which is called the great dissolution or the pralaya. Why this dissolution is necessary when every living being is subjected to death? The presence of ego makes a man live, as ego is a part of antaḥkaraṇa (mind, consciousness, intellect and ego). Without ego the man cannot exist. The ego is present in the soul and not in the physical body. The presence of ego in the soul hides the Brahman from realization. The souls never get destroyed and subject to their karmic account either they are reborn or merge with the Brahman. The law of karma says that a soul can have only three solutions. One is to merge with the Brahman, second is to reborn and the third is to get dissolved during the great dissolution. A majority of the souls are re-reborn. To remove the evil effects of ego in the souls, the great dissolution takes place. Such great dissolutions take place after billions of years. The soul can be destroyed only by the Supreme Brahman. The Supreme Brahman simply acts as a witness and does not get involved in the actions associated with the souls. At one point of time, He wakes up and causes the great dissolution by taking back all the atoms of the universe. The great dissolution happens when lesser number of souls merges with the Brahman and more souls are reborn. Such a situation arises, only when more sins are committed. In fact the great dissolution means the total destruction of ego from the universe. Not even a single life exists after the great dissolution. The Brahman draws the entire universe unto him and at the time of recreation, this takes the shape of the golden egg or hiraṇyagarbha.

271. ईश्वरी
The one who does the act of tirodhāna explained in the previous nāma. Īśvara tattva is the 26th tattva (principle) out of the 36 tattvas, where the power of knowledge is predominant. Īśvara controls everything. Īśvara is parāhaṃtā, meaning Supreme individuality. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma nāma 36 is also Īśvara.

272. सदाशिवा
Look at the beauty of placement of nāma-s. As deliberated earlier, the Brahman has got five duties to perform. The first four have been discussed in the previous nāma-s. In these nāma-s, first the action was referred followed by the form of the Brahman who looks after that particular action. For example take nāma-s 264 and 265. Nāma 264 is sṛṣṭi-kartrī, the act of creation and 265 is brahma-rūpā the form of god who performs the act of creation. It is the case with other three. While talking about the gracious re-creative aspect of the Brahman, the form of God is referred first, then the action. Possibly Vāc-Devi-s could have thought that merely uttering this nāma alone would give salvation. She is in the form of Sadāśivā. Sadā means ever and Śiva means auspicious. The Sadāśivā form of the Brahman is the most auspicious form and She is said to be in that form. In the stage of Sadāśivā tattva, icca śakti or the will (to create) is predominant. The concept of “I am this” begins to dawn (this stage is not “I am That”), where perfect purity is not yet attained. In this stage universal consciousness is discovered. The individual consciousness has not yet merged with the universal consciousness. Śaktī is the intent of the Brahman to recreate. The power of will of the Brahman at this stage is to bless the universe for recreation and this act is being described in the next nāma. The power of will of the Brahman has three distinct categories, śuddhavidyā, Īśvara and Sadāśiva.

273. अनुग्रहदा
The action of the gracious Sadāśiva, the blessing aspect for recreation is being referred. Anugraha means grace, promoting, etc. When the universe got dissolved, there exists nothing. The atoms of all the souls got compressed and embedded in the hiraṇyagarbha or the golden egg. The blessing aspect of the Brahman is the act of recreation after the dissolution. This act of recreation is done by Śaktī, the Supreme Mother. Sadāśivā form of the Brahman is endowed with compassion. The importance of Guru is stressed in ancient scriptures. While worshipping Śrī cakra, Guru lineage is worshipped first. Guru is first worshipped in the form of praṇava (OM), then in the forms of Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudrā, Mahādeva and Sadāśiva. These five forms of the Brahman, discussed in the previous nāma-s are worshipped in the form of Guru.

274. पञ्चकृत्यपरायणा
She is the abode of all the five functions discussed above. Nāma 250 Pañca-brahma-svarūpinī already said that She is in the cause of all these five acts. All these five acts are carried out by Her as prākaśa (cit) vimarśa (śaktī) mahā māyā svarūpinī. She is also known as Cit Śaktī. Cit means the consciousness that is absolute and unchanging. Pratyabhijñāhṛdayam, a Kashmiri saivaism text on Self-realisation says that Śaktī brings about the universe by Her own free will and not by extraneous powers. The universe is already contained in Her implicitly and She makes it explicit. Even in a soul, He (meaning Śiva) does the five kṛtya-s. He does the five-fold act of manifesting, relishing, thinking out, settling of the seed and dissolution. One fails to recognise His own powers (five kṛtya-s), because of ignorance. (kṛtya कृत्य means to be performed; whereas kṛtyā कृत्या means wickedness)

275. भानुमण्डलमध्यस्था
She is in the middle of solar orbit. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (I.vi.6) says, “There is deity within the orbit of the sun, who is seen by yogis. His whole body glitters like gold.” ‘Obeisance to that form in the sun’s orbit the one, who is the embodiment of all the Veda-s, who showers his brilliance all over the different worlds (These worlds are the seven vyāhṛti-s of pūrṇa Gāyatrī mantra. Worlds refer to seven worlds above and seven worlds beneath totalling to fourteen. These imaginary worlds are the modifications of one’s consciousness. The worlds could also refer to three types of mundane consciousness, awake, dream and deep sleep). Anāhat cakra is also called bhānu-maṇḍala and kuṇḍalinī also glitters like gold. Possibly, this nāma could mean Her kuṇḍalinī form.

276. भैरवी
Wife of Bhairavā (Śiva) is Bhairavī. They are inseparable. It is interesting to know about the Bhairava form of Śiva. Bha means sustenance of the universe, ra means the great dissolution and va means recreation. This form of Śiva is considered as one of His subtle forms and is beyond the essence of energy of Śaktī (not beyond Śaktī Herself) and is the manifestation of the Supreme Brahman. This is a stage beyond all the stages of consciousness. No tattva-s, no mantra-s, beyond OM, in fact Bhairava is beyond everything. There is a series of yogic practices referred in Vijñānabhairava, a famous and ancient Kashmiri text on yoga (verse 24). ‘There are two points in our respiration. One is the outer space where exhalation ends and the other is the point within our respiratory system where the inhalation ends. In both these points, the breath takes rest for a split second. The rest does not mean that it stops for a split second, but remains in the form of Śaktī in a stage of suspended animation. One should concentrate on this Śaktī to realize the Brahman. This Śaktī is called Bhairavī. This masterly interpretation also confirms the prakāśa and vimarśa aspect of the Brahman. Śaktī is moving up and down as prāṇa and therefore vimarśa form. Prakāśa is the static Self-illuminating Ātman within. This is the reason why yoga teaches on the concentration of breath. The form of Bhairava that we see in temples is not the Bhairava discussed here. These forms of Bhairava are protectors of temples and the community living around temples. In general it should be understood that the union of Śiva and Śaktī is known as vāc. Śiva is the meaning of a word and Śaktī is root of the word. It is also said that Śiva and Śaktī cannot be separated. They are united firmly like a word and its meaning. One cannot separate the meaning from the word. It is the same concept with Bhairava and Bhairavī. A girl of twelve years is called as Bhairavī.

277. भगमालिनी
Bhaga has many meanings. Goddess Savitṛī is also addressed as Bhaga. It also means good fortune, happiness, welfare, prosperity, dignity, majesty, distinction, excellence, beauty, loveliness, etc. She is in the form of Bhagamālinī, one of the tithi nitya devi-s. There are fifteen tithi nitya devi-s, one nitya devi-s for each lunar day. Tithi means one lunar day. In her mantra ‘bhaga’ appears several times. Hence this tithi nitya devi is called Bhagamālinī. They are worshipped during Śrī Cakra navāvaraṇa pūja. In Liṅga Purāṇa there is a reference (I.99.6, 7) to a goddess called Bhagā. “She is the mother of the universe. Her name is Bhaga. She is the threefold pedestal (the bottom portion of Liṅga) of the deity, in the form of Liṅga”. This description perfectly fits Umā and Maheśvarā (Śaktī and Śiva). The pedestal on which Liṅga is placed is called Bhagā. Bhagā also means the six qualities of Śaktī which is explained in nāma 279. She is wearing a garland twined with these six qualities of prosperity.

278. पद्मासना
She is seated on a lotus or She is sitting in the posture of padmāsana (a yogic way of sitting, cross legged). Padma means lotus. When one is seated in padmāsana, the posture will appear like a lotus. The leaves of lotus creeper are compared to prakṛti (the source of objectivity), its filaments to vikṛti (categories, changed condition), and its stalk to knowledge. Padma also means the Goddess of wealth Lakṣmī. In this context it indicates that She distributes wealth to Her devotees. Here wealth does not mean material wealth only, but also the intellectual wealth, the capacity to have higher level of consciousness, needed to realise the Brahman. It could also mean the Brahma, the lord of Creation.

279. भगवती
She is endowed with auspiciousness and power of autonomy of Śiva. This nāma is an extension of nāma 277. Bhaga refers to six qualities of Śaktī viz. supremacy, righteousness, fame, prosperity, wisdom and discrimination. The nāma means to highlight certain important qualities of the Brahman. She is endowed with these qualities. There is another set of six qualities and they are creation and destruction, waxing and waning, knowledge and ignorance. It is also said that She is worshipped by all gods and goddesses, therefore She is known as Bhagavatī. In Viṣṇu Sahasranāma, nāma 558 is Bhagavate which carries the same meaning. The masculine gender of Bhagavatī is used in Viṣṇu Sahasranāma.

280. पद्मनाभसहोदरी
She is the younger sister of Lord Viṣṇu. Brahma and Lakṣmī, Viṣṇu and Umā, Śiva and Sarasvatī are twins. They represent creation, sustenance and destruction. Sarasvatī got married to Brahma, Lakṣmī to Viṣṇu and Umā to Śiva. This is a beautiful description of interdependence of creation in mythology. The Brahman is divided into two aspects. One is the form of righteousness (dharma) and another is the possessor of righteousness. The dharma portion of the Brahman is divided into two, male and female. Viṣṇu, the male form of dharma portion of the Brahman is sustainer of this universe. Śaktī, the female portion of the righteousness became the wife of Śiva. She is called Umā. Śiva, His wife Umā and Viṣṇu combine is referred as the Brahman in this nāma. The three nāmas 278, 279 and 280 subtly convey the first kūṭa (vāgbhava kūṭa) of Pañcadaśī mantra (क ए ई ल ह्रीं). That is why these nāma-s do not convey any serious meaning as seen in other nāma-s. In fact, these nāma-s convey the secretive mantra form.

281. उन्मेषनिमिषोत्पन्नविपन्नभुवनावली
Unmeṣa means opening eye lids and nimiṣ means closing of eye lids. The creation and dissolution of the universe happens at the wink of Her eyes. When She opens Her eyes, universe is created and when She closes Her eyes, universe is dissolved (vipanna). She does these crucial acts with great ease. This nāma actually highlights the ease with which the Brahman creates and dissolves this universe. Saundarya Laharī (verse 55) also speaks on the same tone. “The sages have said that the world gets dissolved and created with the closing and opening of your eyes respectively. I suppose that your eyes have dispensed with winking in order to save from dissolution of this entire world which has had its through the opening of your eyes.” This nāma conveys the subtle nature of the cosmic creation. Kashmiri texts interpret Unmeṣa as the externalising of icchā śakti, the commencement of world process. Unmeṣa also means the unfoldment of spiritual consciousness, which is attained by focussing on the inner consciousnss.

282. सहस्रशीर्षवदना
Sahasra in this context means infinite and literally means thousand. She has countless heads and faces. The next two nāma-s also have the same meaning. Unable to describe Her supremacy by words, Vāc Devi-s have used an envisioned form here that encompasses summate supremacy. In fact, it can be considered as true in literal sense. Since the Brahman has so many acts to do in different places at the same time, the Brahman needed countless numbers of heads. The countless number of heads for the Brahman is described in Veda-s and Upaniṣads. Bhagavad Gīta (XIII.13) says “He dwells in the world, enveloping all – everywhere, His hands and feet; present on all sides, His eyes and ears, His mouth and heads”. The Brahman has no form and therefore has no sensory organs. The Brahman can be explained in two ways; one is by negation and the other by affirmation. These nāmas explain the Brahman by affirmations. These descriptions are called cosmic intelligence, hence beyond human comprehension Mahānārāyaṇa Upaniṣad (I.13) says “He (the Brahman) became the possessor of the eyes, faces, hands and feet of all creatures in every part of the universe (ववस््तश्च्क्ष् ववश््तोमगखः)”. Thus, the Upaniṣad confirms that the Brahman exists in every living being of this universe. Puruṣasūkta also says ‘Puruṣa (the Brahman) has thousands of heads, thousands of eyes, thousands of feet’. Each element of universal creation is individualized Cosmic Consciousness.

283. सहस्राक्षी
She has thousands of eyes. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma 226 also conveys the same meaning.

284. सहस्रपात्
She has thousands of feet. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma 227 also conveys the same meaning. Puruṣasūktam opens by saying “सहस्र-श षाु परुगषः । सहस्राक्षः सहरपात॥् “ The first kūṭa of Pañcadaśī mantra is discreetly revealed in nāma-s 278 to 280. The second and third kūta-s (ह स क ह ल ह्रीं। स क ल ह्रीं॥) of the mantra is revealed in nāma-s 281 to 284.

285. आब्रह्मकीटजननी
The Supreme creator. She creates from Brahma to the smallest insect. Brahma here means humans. Human form is said to be supreme creation of God. Look at the placement of these nāma-s. After having described the Brahman from nāma 281 to 284, Vāc Devi-s in this nāma have consolidated their description, by mentioning the creative aspect of the Brahman. The Brahman was descried with countless heads, ears and feet only to highlight the ease with which creation is being made by Her.

286. वर्णाश्रमविधायिनि
Varṇāśrama means the order of life as expounded in Vedās. Veda-s classify people based upon their knowledge and capabilities. For example, soldiers are needed to protect borders of countries, agriculturists are needed to grow grains for consumption to make a living, traders are needed to buy requirements, and priests are needed to perform rituals. Veda-s say that the classification is not based upon their birth, but on the ability of a person to perform certain duties. It would not be logical to expect a trader to protect borders effectively. Therefore the inclination, capacity, knowledge and experience are the parameters by which a person is classified. Such classifications are applicable only to the human race. Since She is not different from Veda-s and all the Veda-s originated from Her, it is said that She has made these classifications. Having created the universe, She also created the Veda-s to effectively administer the universe. Veda-s lay down rules and regulations to be followed in a human life. Path shown by Veda-s is known as dharma or righteousness. If one trespasses prescribed righteousness by Veda-s, he gets afflicted by karma-s that leads to several transmigrations. Kṛṣṇa explains this in Bhagavad Gīta. “The duties are allocated according to guṇa-s springing from their own nature (XVIII.41). Each one attentive to his own duty, he gains the highest success. How far one is devoted to his inborn duty, thus far he attains success (XVIII.45). If I did not perform actions in a balanced way, the universe would be annihilated and I would be the cause of improper admixture of duties (III.24).”

287. निजाज्ञारूपनिगमा
She conveys Her commands through Veda-s. Derivatives of Veda-s prescribe the actions to be done and not to be done. Such actions depend upon the classifications based on the previous nāma. If all men perform all the actions prescribed in Veda-s, there can be no perfection. For example, a person cannot be an expert in medical, legal and financial fields all at the same time. To attain proficiency in one’s field, more experience is required. This is the reason behind nāma 286. Though Veda-s themselves do not discuss much on such acts, (karma kāṇḍa -s of Veda-s discuss certain gross actions) the derivatives of Veda-s like śāstra-s and Purāṇa-s clearly spell out the kriya-s (performance towards atonement) and karma-s (actions causing future reactions afflicting karmic account) to be done and not to be done. But it is widely believed that śāstra-s are of later origin and do not derive significantly from the teachings of Veda-s and Upaniṣads. By and large this argument is to be accepted, as they do not typically teach the ways to realising the Self within. Therefore it is to be understood that there is a huge difference between Her commands through Veda-s directly, and through śāstra-s indirectly. Here it means Her commands are only through Veda-s. Following śāstra-s depends upon one’s outlook, tradition and lineage. Her commands through Veda-s are conveyed to those who are exponents of Veda-s such as sages and saints. It is also believed that such sages and saints prescribed śāstra-s. Many are of the view that śāstra-s initiate a person to pursue religious path and later into spiritual path.

288. पुण्यापुण्यफलप्रदा
Puṇyāpuṇya consist of two words puṇya + a-puṇya. Puṇya means the good or right, virtue, purity, good work, meritorious act, moral or religious merit, and a-puṇya means the illusionary puṇya. Illusionary puṇya or apuṇya is not exactly pāpa. Apuṇya is done out of ignorance and it is not as bad as committing sins or pāpa. Such discriminations are made based upon the teachings of Vedas. Brahma Sūtra (II.i.34) says, “No partiality and cruelty because of His taking other factors into consideration. For so the Veda-s show.” What is sown in is reaped. Results arising out of such actions are transferred to one’s karmic account. The end result of karmic account is rebirths and its associated pains and sufferings. Such results accrue at Her command as She is the Lord of karma-s. Brahma Sūtra (III.ii.7) confirms this. It says, “फलमत ् उपपतेः (phalamat upapateḥ)” which means “The fruit of action is from Him, this being the logical position.”

289. श्रुतिसीमन्तसिन्दूरीकृतपादाब्जधूलिका
This nāma describes Her as the Supreme Brahman, the Absolute. Veda-s are considered as the most sacred texts of all. In this nāma the four Veda-s are personified as goddesses. When these goddesses pay respects to Her by bending and placing their heads at Her feet, the reflection of red colour radiating from the ‘dust’ of Her feet make marks on the parting hair on the heads of these goddesses and appear like vermilion placed on the forehead of married women. The word ‘dust’ is symbolically mentioned here. The meaning of dust in this context is as follows: Upaniṣads are considered as the head of all Veda-s as they teach ways and means to realize the Brahman. Even these Upaniṣads are not able to describe the Brahman in His original form. Such descriptions are made only by negations and affirmations. It is the case with Veda-s as well. Veda-s never make a perfect description of the Brahman. This is because the real form of Brahman is beyond comprehension for the normal human mind. Since the Veda-s are represented by these goddesses, they feel ashamed in their inability to describe Her in words. They are satisfied by wearing the dust in Her feet in their parting hair and get satisfied that they are at least able to wear the dust that gives them some knowledge (the knowledge of the Brahman) about Her. Saundarya Laharī (verses 2 and 3) describes Her feet. “Collecting microscopic particles of the dust falling from your lotus feet, Brahma, Viṣṇu and Śiva carry out their actions.” The next verse says. “The particles of dust of your lotus feet serve to remove the internal darkness of the ignorant.” Nāmas 287 and 288 dealt with the karma kāṇḍa of the Veda-s and this nāma deals with jñāna kāṇḍa.

290. सकलागमसन्दोहशुक्तिसम्पुटमौक्तिका
Her nose ring has been discussed in nāma 20. The ring made of pearl encompasses the āgama-s prescribed Veda-s. Āgama-s are traditional doctrines or precepts that lay down guidelines for various rituals, mostly with temples. It is a huge subject and is the combination of vāstu śāstra, astrology, astronomy etc. Earlier nāma-s said that even Veda-s could not describe the Brahman. In the same way āgama-s also could not describe the Brahman. Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II.9) says, “Words together with thoughts return from Brahman unable to reach it.” Therefore, the Brahman could not be reached by Veda-s, formed out of words. The Brahman is beyond words. The words or thoughts can make one realize something to which he has familiarity or experience. But the Brahman cannot be realized this way. The only way to realize the Brahman is by internal search and exploration. When compared to the Brahman, the Vedās or śāstra-s are insignificant. That is why this nāma says such Veda-s or śāstra-s etc are within the tiny piece of Her nose ring. {Further reading on āgama: Advaita philosophy acknowledges six types of knowledge. They are perception (pratyakṣa), inference (anumāna), verbal testimony (śabda or āgama), comparison (upamāna), postulation (arthāpatti), and non-apprehension (anupalabdhi). Śabda as a source of valid knowledge means āgama, authentic word that is free from all defects. It is a canon of knowledge recognised by most Indian systems of thought that the words of such persons as are free from delusion, error, deceit and defects of the senses and the mind are source of valid cognition. Thus, reason is implicit in faith. It is not unreasonable to rely on the reliable. Generally, āgama can said to mean Vedic testimony.}

291. पुरुषार्थप्रदा
Puruṣārtha is the fourfold values of human life. They are dharma (righteousness or virtues), artha (wish or purpose), kāma (desires and pleasures) and mokṣa (the liberation). It is clear that the ancient scriptures do not prohibit these great human values. What they say is not to get attached to them. On many occasions this concept is misquoted. She is the giver of this puruṣārtha. There is another interpretation. Puruṣā means Śiva (Śaktī is prakṛti), artha means salvation and prada means giver. Śiva gives salvation through Śaktī. The importance of Śaktī is emphasized or probably the interdependence of Śiva and Śaktī is cited through this nāma.

292. पूर्णा
She is the perfect (without blemishes) totality of everything. Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (V.i.1) says पूणमु दः पूणुलमदींपूणाुत्पूण्मगदु च्यत।े पूणस्ु य पूणमु ादाय पूणमु ेवावलशष्यते॥ pūrṇamadaḥ pūrṇamidaṃ pūrṇātpūrṇmudacyate| pūrṇasya pūrṇamādāya pūrṇamevāvaśiṣyate ॥ “That (the Brahman) is infinite and this (universe) is infinite. One infinite, proceeds to the other infinite. Then taking the infinitude of the infinite (universe), it remains as the infinite (the Brahman) alone”. There is no better verse than this to explain the all- pervading Brahman. She is “That” (the Brahman, as Brahman alone is perfect and complete).

293. भोगिनी
Bhoga means luxuries. She is the enjoyer of all luxuries. The embodiment of luxuries (She), enjoying the luxuries (of Her creations). Possibly this nāma is derived from the previous nāma saying that the Brahman proceeds to the Brahman itself. Here the term luxury could mean Her creations and She enjoys the acts of Her creation. There is a saying that God watches all our actions. Bhoginī is the name of a female serpent, indicating Her kuṇḍalinī form. But this explanation at this point seems to be inappropriate.

294. भुवनेश्वरी
Bhuvana means the universe. She is the ruler (Īśvari) of this universe. Seven worlds below the planet earth including earth and seven worlds above the earth are together called universe. These fourteen represent the products of the five tattva-s and antaḥkaraṇa. “hrīṃ” (ह्रीं) is known as Bhuvaneśvari bīja, also known as māyā bīja. This bīja has the potency of creation and is considered as one of the powerful bīja-s, as it is the combination of Śiva bīja (ह), Agni (रीं) bīja and kāmakalā (ईं). When She is enjoying all the luxuries, She ought to be a great ruler and this is what is stressed here. Bhuvaneśvara is Śiva and His wife is Bhuvaneśvarī.

295. अम्बिका
The mother of the universe. This is different from the first nāma Śrī Mātā. There She was referred as the mother of all living beings of the universe. Here She is called as the mother of the universe itself comprising of both living and non-living beings. This nāma mentions about Her creative action that comprises of iccā, jñāna and kriyā śaktī-s (desire or will, knowledge and action). There is also a saying that Śiva represents day and Śaktī represents night, basically due to Her māyā.

296. अनादिनिधना
She has neither a beginning nor an end. The nature of the Brahman is described, who alone is infinite. Elation is said to be of two kinds. The first kind is having a feeling of Self-realisation, though one is miles away from realising the Brahman. This illusion is considered as an impediment to Godrealization (Self-realization). Since this is the cause of māyā, She will remove this kind of māyā for those, who are worthy of making spiritual progress. The second type is that certain siddhi-s that are derived during spiritual progression. For example the intuitive power, sudden realization of the Brahman like a flash possibly from the words of one’s guru or somebody, an unexpected meeting with a sage who could transfer the divine energy by a mere look, etc. Sudden chance, which makes a person to reach new heights both materially and spiritually also, happens at Her discretion. Since She is the cause for such elations and there is no beginning or end for such of Her activities, She is called anādi-nidhanā. Anādi means existing from eternity and nidhana means domicile. Nidhana also means destruction. Sāṃkhya sūtra (III.38, 39 and 40) refers to three types of destructions (in fact, they are not destructions but distractions), “Inability is twenty eight fold; Acquiescence is nine fold; Perfection is eight fold.” Inability means depravation. One can worship Her using his organs of perception (jñānendriyas), five cognitive faculties (knowledge) and the mind. If they become dysfunctional, She cannot be worshipped. The cause of dysfunction is known as aśaktī. There are two other distractions. One is tuṣṭi, satisfaction personified. This arises out of illusion. For example, having a false feeling of emancipation is tuṣṭi, which is again divided into two types. The third is siddhi-s, the acquisition of supernatural powers by magical means or the supposed faculty so acquired (the eight usually enumerated are given in the following verse, “aṇimā laghimā prāptiḥ prākāmyam mahimā tathā īśitvaṃ ca vaśitvaṃ ca tathā kāmāvasāyitā”. These siddhi-s are hindrance to the Ultimate realisation.

297. हरिब्रह्मेन्द्रसेविता
Hari (Viṣṇu), Brahma and Indra worship Her. In Śrī cakra pūja, Hari, Brahma and Indra are all worshipped. The importance of Śaktī worship is underlined in this nāma. The Gods mentioned here are no demigods, but the creator and upholder and the lord of all gods and goddesses. They too, on their own merits are powerful. Śiva is not mentioned here possibly due to two reasons. He being Her consort, is not worshipped by Her or there is no difference between Śiva and Śaktī. The second interpretation seems to be appropriate. It has been discussed earlier that Brahman is the combination of static and kinetic energy. Though kinetic energy originates from the static energy, the latter cannot function without the aid of the former. This concept is explained here. Hari (Viṣṇu), Brahma and Indra should not be taken in literal sense. In fact, Veda-s talk about them more frequently than Śaktī. It is also to be understood that mastery of Veda-s alone do not help to realize the Brahman. One has to go beyond Veda-s to understand the Creation and the Creator. Both Creation and the Creator refer to the Supreme Mother or “Ma” as She is fondly called. The same interpretation is conveyed in Śivānanda Laharī (verse 4) for Śiva. “Thousands of Gods abound, offering trifling gifts to them who pray and never even in my dreams would I pray or request gifts from them. Śiva who is close to Viṣṇu, Brahma and other Gods, but is difficult for them to near Him, I would beseech and beg always for His lotus feet.”

298. नारायणी
This nāma can be explained in several ways. Śivānanda Laharī (Śivānanda Laharī consists of one hundred verses on Śiva. Saundarya Laharī consists of one hundred verses on Śaktī) verse 82 says, that Hari (Viṣṇu) and Haran (Śiva) are conjoined in several ways. It says “ardhavapuṣa bharyatvam āryāpate” which means Viṣṇu holds the position of Śiva’s wife as Śiva holds Viṣṇu in His left vertical half. This is the place of Śaktī in ardhanārīśvara form of Śiva. The Form of Śiva and Viṣṇu combine is called Śaṇkara Nārāyaṇa. This clearly indicates that there is no difference between Viṣṇu (also known as Nārāyaṇa) and Lalitāmbikā. This conception is further confirmed in this Sahasranāma itself in nāma-s like Govinda-rūpinī (269), Mukunda (838) and Viṣṇu-rūpinī (893). Nārāyana is the combination of two words nara + ayaṇa. Nara here means the Brahman. Since water first originated from the Brahman, water is also called nara. Water is said to be first abode of the Brahman, hence the Brahman having the abode of water is called Nārāyaṇa. Since there is no difference between Lalitāmbikā and the Brahman, She is addressed as Nārāyaṇī. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma nāma 245 is Nārāyaṇa. The following is the explanation given to that nāma. “The creation is made out of that Ātman (the Brahman). Such creations are known as nārāni. The abode of nārāni is called Nārāyaṇa. The feminine gender of Nārāyaṇa is Nārāyaṇī. This nāma also reconfirms Her Brahmanic status. There are several such confirmations in this Sahasranāma.

299. नादरूपा
She is in the form of sound. Varivasyā Rahasya, the text that explains Pañcadaśi mantra (I.12 and 13) says, “The form of hrīṃ (ह्रीं) is composed of twelve letters: vyoman (h), agni (r), vāmalocanā (ī), bindu (ṃ), ardhacandra, rodhinī, nāda, nādānta, śaktī, vyāpikā, samanā and unmanī.” The aggregate of the last eight is known as nāda. Out of the last eight, the subtlest is unmanī and they are placed above the bindu (dot). {Further reading on sound: The supreme divine energy is called Parā-Śaktī. Parā-Śaktī is the divine Mother and naturally has concern for the universe. In the state of parā (nāma 366), Śaktī is in the initial stage of manifestation. The next higher stage of parā is paśyantī (nāma 368) where there are questions and answers. Questions and answers leads to knowledge. In stage of paśyantī, there exists no difference between the word and the object of reference. The next stage is madhyamā (nāma 370) where the difference begins to arise between the word and the object of reference, but only in the levels of antaḥkaraṇa. In other words, the difference between the paśyantī and madhyamā is only subtle and not reflected at the gross level (meaning delivery of speech). In the last and final stage called vaikharī (nāma 371), the difference becomes gross and the sound is deciphered. But it should be understood that Parā-Śaktī Herself does not undergo these changes, but such changes happen at Her command in the inward psychic apparatus of an individual. She is known by these names during the different stages of evolution of speech. These stages are discussed in the subsequent nāma-s. The transition between madhyamā and vaikharī contains eight stages and the third stage is called nāda and their samaṣṭi (aggregate) is also known as nāda. In general this nāma says that She is in the form of sound. She is Śabda Brahman. Further details are discussed in the respective nāma-s.}

300. नामरूपविवर्जिता
She is without name (nāma) and form (rūpa). Vivarjitā means devoid. She is beyond names and forms, an exclusive quality of the Brahman. Every creation has two aspects. One is cit and another acit. Cit means the universal consciousness and a-cit means individual consciousness. Both cit and a-cit are derived from the Supreme Consciousness or the divine consciousness. Cit is again sub-divided into existence, knowledge and bliss. The Brahman is the cause for these three. A-cit consists of nāma and rūpā (name and form) and this is opposed to cit in the sense, it does not represent the Brahman. When the union of empirical “I” with the “I” consciousness of Śiva takes place, creation happens. The derivatives of “I” consciousness of Śiva are existence, knowledge and bliss. Name and form are the products of empirical consciousness. Since the nāma says She is beyond nāma and rūpā (name and form), it is implied that She belongs to Cit, the Supreme Consciousness which is also known as the Brahman. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (VIII.14.1) says, “That which is described as space manifests names and forms. These names and forms are within Brahman. Brahman is immortal. It is the Self”. Vāc Devi-s utilize every opportunity to mention Her as the Supreme Brahman. The Brahman can be described either through negations or through affirmations. Here the quality of the Brahman is described by negation.

301. ह्रींकारी
She is in the form of māyā bīja hrīṁ. Hrīṁ is also called śākta praṇava or śaktī praṇava, which means that the worshippers of śaktī, call hrīṁ as praṇava bīja of Śaktī. This is also known as Bhuvaneśvarī bījā (Nāma 294 is Bhuvaneśvarī). Praṇava is the supreme ॐ. The power of hrīṁ bīja is as powerful as ॐ. That is why in Pañcadaśī mantra every kūṭa or group ends with the bīja hrīṁ. Hrīṁ is the combination of ha (ह) + ra (र) + ī (ई) + ma (म) + bindu ('). Ha refers to manifestation, ra indicates involution (action of enfolding, the action of māyā), ī indicates perfection and the bindu, a dot on top of the bīja controls all the three. Therefore hrīṁ means manifestation, involution and perfection. The appearance of the bodily form enfolded by perfection is the literal meaning of the bīja hrīṁ. This means that māyā or illusion is causing a veil around the Brahman and this veil can be removed only if one realizes the Supreme Consciousness of Śaktī. Unless the kinetic energy (Śaktī) is fully realized, it is not possible to feel the pulsation of Śiva, the static energy. In fact this bīja can also be called as Śiva-Śaktī bīja as ha stands for Śiva bījā and kāmakalā - īṁ (ईं) stands for Śaktī bīja. The bīja ra (र) conjoins these two bīja-s to form a single Śiva-Śaktī bīja. The role of ra in any bīja is significant. The sound of ra is the chief of all the sounds. Whenever hrīṁ is chanted, it endues peace and auspiciousness. In any bīja the bindu is important and most of the bīja-s have bindu. For example take the letter ha (ह). When a dot is placed at the top of this ha it becomes haṁ (हीं). Without bindu an alphabet remains as an alphabet and becomes a bījā only if a ‘dot’ is placed above the alphabet. The bindu though tiny, is yet very powerful. There are three major sub divisions in a bindu leading to the union of Śiva and Śaktī, from where the three exclusive actions of the Brahman viz. creation, sustenance and destruction originate. The three major sub divisions are bindu representing Śiva, bīja representing Śaktī and nāda representing their union. A bindu above ha, one of the alphabets of hrīṁ spells like haṁ. This bīja haṁ, a component of hrīṁ represents creation (h), sustenance (a) and destruction (ṁ) the three functions of the Brahman. The bindu undergoes subtle changes from its origin to delivery. It originates as Parā Śaktī and gets modified as paśyantī, madhyamā and delivered at vaikari, (Please refer nāma 299 for additional details.) At the time of delivery it undergoes modifications through eight stages) by deriving power from five basic elements and gets blessed by Brahma, Viṣṇu and Rudra. It begins its journey from the heart cakra with the letter ‘a’ (अ), moves to the throat cakra and conjoins with ‘u’(उ) and further goes up to palate where it conjoins with ‘ṁ’ (मीं), the three components of OM (a + u + ṁ). From the palate it moves to forehead where it derives its cosmic energy received through the crown cakra, enters the world of śūnya ( cosmic vacuum) where no energy operates, moves further up towards the top of the skull establishing a link through brahmarandhra with mahā śūnya (the great cosmic vacuum), where the Creation takes place. When it moves further, the creation becomes transcendental energy and the life begins to exist out of the Self illuminating cosmic brilliance. That is why bindu is said to be in the form of a luminous dot like the sun, born out of the union of Śiva and Śaktī. There is no differentiation between the bīja hrīṁ and Śiva-Śaktī combine, the point of origin and the point of annihilation of this universe.

302. ह्रीमती
Hrī means modesty. Veda-s describe Her as endowment of modesty, mind, satisfaction, desire and nourishment. All these indicate māyā. Her māyā or illusory form is described in this nāma. It is also said that Her modesty prevents Her in participating in the rituals performed with pomp and vanity. She is ashamed of participating in such rituals. The worship of Śaktī should always be secretive in nature. She has a liking for such secretive worships and these worships are performed only internally. By worshipping Her internally, one realizes Her subtle forms viz. kāmakalā and kuṇḍalinī forms. Realization through internal worship is much faster than by performing external rituals.

303. हृद्या
She resides in the heart. Soul is said to be in the centre of the heart. Heart also stands for compassion and love. Since She is the Divine Mother, these qualities are in built in Her. Or it could also mean that She is loved by everybody. Katha Upaniṣad (II.i.13) says, “The thumb sized puruṣaḥ (soul) is seen as smokeless flame rests in the centre of the body.”

304. हेयोपादेयवर्जिता
She has nothing to reject and nothing to accept. Rejection and acceptance (do this and do not do this) are laid down by scriptures. The source of these scriptures is the Veda-s and based on certain procedures followed by our ancestors. These are the rules and regulations that permit certain actions and prohibit certain others. These are also known as śāstra-s. Śāstra-s generally can be explained as compendium of rules or a book of treatise. Many of the śāstra-s are based on the procedures followed by our ancestors. The guideline that was applicable centuries ago may not be applicable in today’s situation. Therefore, there is no point in following śāstra-s without understanding their significance. Adjusting to the present day living is not a sin. Such rejections and acceptances are applicable only to human beings and not to the Brahman.

305. राजराजार्चिता
She is worshipped by king of kings and emperors. This nāma is to be read with the next nāma. Rājarājā means king of kings, Śiva. Since She is the dear wife of Śiva, Śiva worships Her seems to be an appropriate interpretation. Women are worshipped for their mother hood and Śiva who is the universal teacher follows what He preaches. There is another interpretation for this nāma. Rājarājā means Kubera, Manu and ten others making twelve Rājarājā-s. Please refer nāma 238 for further details. Each of them worships Her in their own way and accordingly their Pañcadaśī mantra also gets modified without changing the basics of the mantra (the fifteen bījas). All the twelve names find a place in this Sahasranāma. She is said to have been worshipped by these twelve Rājarāja-s. They are known as Rājarāja-s because of their sincere devotion to Her and She confers on them the status of king of kings.

306. राज्ञी
The queen. This is in line with the previous nāma. Being Śiva’s (Rājarāja or king of kings) wife, She becomes the queen for the kingdom of this universe. The universe is ruled by Śiva and Śaktī. Possibly this could also be a reason for calling Her as the universal Mother or in the shortened form as Mā. When one calls Her as Mā, he will have a feeling that She belongs to you and closer to you.

307. रम्या
She is the most beautiful of all.

308. राजीवलोचना
The choice of words by Vāc Devi-s is amazing. Rājiva means deer, fish or lotus, depending upon the context and locanā means eyes. Eyes of Mā look like the eyes of deer or appear like a fish or look like a lotus flower. They could have addressed Her as Mīnākṣī (refer nāma 18) (eyes look like fish) or could have used kamalanayanā (eyes look like lotus) (refer nāma 62). They have used only Mṛgākṣī (nāma 561) meaning eyes look like the eyes of deer and this nāma to describe Her eyes. The intended meaning of this nāma is that Her eyes are not comparable to anything. Her eyes are full of grace and compassion. By mere winking of eyes, She performs three actions of creation, sustenance and destruction (nāma 281). Rājiva also means king and rājivalocanā means eyes of one who is dependent on king. It has been already seen that Śiva is known as Rājarāja and dependent refers to His devotees. She blesses His devotees with the grace of Her eyes.

309. रञ्जनी
She gives happiness to Her devotees during this birth and also in the Heavens, possibly meaning no-rebirth. The appropriate interpretation of this nāma would be: Rañjana means the act of colouring and also pleasing, charming, rejoicing, delighting, befriending, etc. From this point of view, everything associated with Her is red. Śiva is beyond colour and is pellucid like crystal. When She sits with Him, Śiva’s complexion also turns into red. His crystal complexion becomes radiant with the red complexion of the Supreme Mā. Saundarya Laharī (verse 92) explains this scenario in a different way. “Śiva with His clear lustre has transformed Himself into an apparent bed-cover reddened by your reflected lustre, as the embodied erotic sentiment and yields joy to your eyes.”

310. रमणी
She plays around. She plays with Her devotees. Devotees are everything for Her. She gives happiness to them and She plays with them too. Providing happiness to one’s children and playing with them is one of the motherly qualities. Her motherly attribute is highlighted here. But devotees always keep a distance from Her out of fear and respect. This is the biggest setback in God realization. Fear and respect should pave way for love and affection. Unfortunately, She is being considered as a different entity from one’s own self. When we say that She is omnipresent, why should we consider Her as a different person? This is what Chāndogya Upaniṣad VIII.12.3 says “In the same way, the joyful self arises from the body and attaining the light of the Cosmic Self, appears in his own form. This is the Paramātman, the Cosmic Self. He then freely moves about eating, playing, or enjoying himself with women, carriages or relatives, not remembering at all, the body in which he was born. Just as horses or bullocks are harnessed to carriages, similarly life remains harnessed to the body due to karma”. The articulation by this Upaniṣad clearly proves that Self is not different from the Brahman. If one feels the difference, it is due to māyā or illusion. When we eat meat, She also eats meat with us. When we relish onion, She also relishes onion with us. When we are poor, She is also poor and when we are rich She is also rich. This is the uniqueness of omnipresence. Arjuna says to Kṛṣṇa after seeing his universal form (viśva-rūpadarśan) “Overjoyed I am, that gazed upon a vision never seen before, yet my mind is afflicted with fear. Be merciful to me and show only your God form (the original form of Kṛṣṇa)” (Bhagavad Gīta XI.45). We should never feel that God is different from our Self. The God within you and within him is one and the same. The only difference is the soul. Certain souls realize God and certain others do not realize God and this purely depends upon one’s karma.

311. रस्या
She is in the form of essence of Ātman. The meaning of rasa (essence) can be understood from Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II.vii) which says raso vai saḥ. The meaning is “That is to be identified with sweetness.” It further says that “anyone who has this sweetness is happy” and the source of sweetness comes from the Self. Happiness is bliss and it says that bliss can be attained only if individual Self is realized. ‘That’ means the Supreme Self. The nāma says that She is in the form of That Supreme Self. The Supreme Self is the condensed form of the universe realized as the empirical Self.

312. रणत्किङ्किणिमेखला
She is wearing a waistband with small bells hanging from it. The same narration also finds a place in Saundarya Laharī (verse 7) which says, “Your slender waist which is adorned by jingling girdle string (belt-like gold wait ornament called odyāṇa) having small tinkling gold bells attached.” Therefore the recital given here cannot be the intended interpretation. Possibly this could mean the origin of sound. When She walks, these tiny bells make tinkling sound from where the sound originates. The sound originates from the naval chakra, where the waist belt is worn. It is also said that the sound originates from the drum (damaru) of Śiva. In the same way it can be said that sound originates from Her waist belt. It is also said that these descriptions enable the beginners to visualise Her gross form. She has four types of forms, gross (sthūla), subtle (sūkṣma rūpa), subtler (sūkṣmatara) which is also known as Her kāmakalā dorm and Her subtlest form is kuṇḍalinī form. Her gross form is described in nāma-s twelve to fifty one. Her subtle form (mantra-s) is described in nāma-s 85 to 89. Her subtler form (kāmakalā) is described in 88 and 89. (Nāma 322 is kāmakalā rūpa.) Finally, Her subtlest form kuṇḍalinī is described in 90 to 111. (Psychic cakra-s are discussed in 475 to 534).

313. रमा
Ramā means Lakṣmī, (consort of Viṣṇu) the goddess of wealth. She is in the form of Lakṣmī and bestows wealth on Her devotees. The wealth indicates both materialistic wealth and spiritual wealth. Nāma-s 313, 314 and 315 together form kāmakalā bīja ‘ īm ’ (ईँ). This nāma gives the alphabet ‘Ī’ (ई).

314. राकेन्दुवदना
Her face is compared to the full moon. Full moon is without blemishes. The full moon represents the dot (bindu) above the letter ‘Ī’ which gives rise to the bīja īṁ (ईं). At this stage the letter Ī (ई) has only a dot above it making it as īṁ (ईं), which is yet to transform as kāmakalā.

315. रतिरूपा
She is in the form of Rati, the wife of love god Manmatha, who is also known as Kāma (lust). In the earlier two nāma-s, the bīja īm originated and delivered as a bīja in this nāma. Rati and her spouse Kāma or Manmatha are known for their lecherousness. The kāmakalā is full of auspiciousness and subtly indicates the creation. The bīja īṁ formed in the previous nāma transforms into kāmakalā in this nāma. īṁ becomes īm . Kāmakalā is discussed in detail in nāma 322 kāmakalā rūpā.

316. रतिप्रिया
She is fond of Rati, the wife of Kāma. There is a yakṣiṇī (lower form of demigoddess) called Ratipriyā who gives wealth. She is said to be Kubera’s wife. Kubera is the chief of yakṣa-s. Ratipriyā’s mantra is short and one should chant this mantra in the night sitting on the top of a banyan tree. It is said that the She will appear in person and gives wealth. Her mantra is ‘om raṁ śrīṁ hrīṁ dhaṁ dhanate ratipriye svāhā’ (ॐ रीं ि ीं ह्रीं धीं धनते रनतवप्रये स्वाहा॥). This is to be chanted 100,000 times followed by puraścaraṇa.

317. रक्षाकरी
The one who protects. She is the sustainer of this universe, hence this nāma. There is another interpretation. In specified fire rituals, oblations also consist of herbs. When they are burnt into ashes by the tongs of fire, the ashes are filled in an amulet and worn on the self of a person for the purpose of protection from evils. As ashes are used for protection and in that sense She is the protector. Secondly, ashes also mean the mortal remains of one who existed earlier. In this sense She is the destroyer. Out of the three actions of the Brahman, two are mentioned here. She is in the form of such oblations that will be discussed in later nāma-s (535 and 536).

318. राक्षसघ्नी
The destroyer of demons. Kṛṣṇa says (Bhagavad Gīta IV.8) “I appear from age to age to protect the virtuous and to destroy the evil doers in order to re-establish righteousness”. This is the famous saying of Bhagavad Gīta: paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṁ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām| dharmasaṁsthāpanārthāya sambhavāmi yuge yuge|| पररिाणाय साधनू ाीं ववनाशाय च दष्गकृताम।् धमसु ींस्थापनाथायु समभवालम यगग े यगग े॥ Demons mean the evils. It is believed that when evil prevails everywhere, the great dissolution of the universe takes place and the creation happens again.

319. रामा
She is the embodiment of women. Liṅga Purāṇa says that all men are Śaṃkara (Śiva) and all women are Śaktī. It is also said that women should be respected. If they are ill-treated, their lineage would be destroyed. Ram means to delight. It is agni bīja (रीं). Agni bīja is considered as a potent bīja and when combined with other bīja-s, it increases their potency. Bīja-s in right combination with agni bīja provides blessedness. Yogi-s enjoy when they are submerged in bliss, when Śaktī and Śiva unite at sahasrāra. They are delighted in the stage of bliss, hence she is known as Rāmā. (Lord Rāmā is the delight of yogis; hence He is known as Rāmā.)

320. रमणलम्पटा
She enjoys Her moments with Her consort Śiva at sahasrāra. She enjoys the marital bliss. She loves to play around with Śiva. She makes women devoted to their husbands, since She is the embodiment of women (previous nāma).

321. काम्या
Kāmyā means longing for. She is desired by the seekers of liberation. Liberation is possible only through knowledge and She is that knowledge (nāma 980). The 12th night of dark lunar fortnight is known as kāmyā.

322. कामकलारूपा
She is in the form of kāmakalā. This is Her subtler form which is known only to Her spouse Śiva. The subtlest form is Her kuṇḍalinī form in sahasrāra, where She conjoins Her spouse. Kuṇḍalinī in lower cakra-s does not become subtlest and it attains the subtlest form only in sahasrāra. Kāma refers to the object of adoration, the object that is desired. Here, Śiva becomes the most desired of all, as He is the Supreme Reality or Paramārtha. Śiva being the Supreme Ruler, He is addressed as Kāmeśvara. By addressing Him thus, He not only becomes the object of desire (Kāma), but also becomes the Supreme Ruler (Īśvara). This how He becomes Kāma + Īśvara = Kāmeśvara. Kalā refers to vimarśa form of Śiva, Mahātripurasundarī. Śiva alone is Self-illuminating and Śaktī illuminates the universe with the brilliance of Śiva. Their conjoined form is Kāmakalā. Kāmakalā consists of three bindu-s (dots) forming a triangle and below this triangle there is an inverted triangle (hārda-kalā) where the three kūṭa-s of Pañcadasī mantra are placed. From this lower inverted triangle all triads are born which ultimately leads to the creation of this universe. The two parallel dots are Her bosoms by which this universe is nurtured and a single dot above these two dots is Her third eye. Kāma means intent to create and kalā refers to a part of the main object, in this case, Śiva. The conjugation of Kāma and kalā leads to the manifestation of Kāmeśvara and Kāmeśvarī forms. Śiva and Śaktī unite only in their kāma forms i.e. kāma + īśvarī and kāma + īśvara. These two, are Their highest forms that cause Creation. She is known as ‘Mahā-tripura-sundarī’ in the Kāmakalā form and is also known as bindutraya samaṣti rūpa divyākṣara rūpiṇi. Mahā means supreme, tripura means three cities (could mean entire triads, the cause for creation that are ruled by Her). The deeper meaning of tripura is Her three actions viz. creation, sustenance and destruction. Sundarī means beauty. So ‘Mahā-tripura-sundarī’ means the beautiful and Supreme Mother, who creates, nourishes and dissolves. These three acts are subtly mentioned in Kāmakalā. The three bindu-s are extremely powerful. They represent sun, moon and fire. Bindu is called the highest light. The highest form of light naturally should be the origin of light from which all others should have emerged. Self illuminating light is Śiva and that is why He is called as prakāśa form. Śaktī reflects and distributes the light received from prakāśa form and that is why She is called as vimarśa form. Vimarśa can be explained as knowledge with reasoning. The light of Śiva will not be reflected unless Śaktī is by His side. These three bindu-s are therefore the three different forms of Śaktī and each of which represent three divine energies viz. Vāma, Jyeśta and Raudrī. These goddesses represent Her three acts of creation, nourishment and absorption. This is as far as the upper triangle is concerned. It must be remembered that there is no triangle here but only three bindu-s (Bindu-s are further elaborated in nāma 905). It is called as a triangle because if these dots are joined by straight lines, a triangle is formed. This upper conceived triangle is coupled with the lower hārda-kalā or the lower inverted triangle. Each of the three lines of the triangle represents the three kūṭa-s of Pañcadasī mantra. From this lower triangle which is formed out of the three kūṭa-s of the supreme Pañcadasī mantra, all other mantra-s are born leading to the creation of the universe. Thus the lower triangle is known as the organ of creation from which the universe was created. In the upper triangle the two lower bindu-s mean the sustenance or nourishment and the upper most triangle is the bindu for destruction. These bindu-s are also known as sun, moon and fire possibly indicating sustenance (sun-without which the universe cannot function), sustenance (moon – moon is the symbolic representation of love) and fire (one of the qualities of fire is destruction). This can be in fact compared to the three kūṭa-s of Pañcadasī where the kūṭa-s are also known as agni (fire) kūṭa, Sūrya (sun) kūṭa and Chandra (moon) kūṭa. The same interpretation is given in Saundarya Laharī (verse 19) which says, “The one who meditates on your Kāmakalā form, treating your face as the bindu (the upper bindu) and the pair of your bosom (the two lower bindu-s) and the half of the letter H below it (the lower triangle), at once impassions women, is but a triviality.” It is not appropriate to provide a detailed interpretation, which should be known only from a learned guru of Śrī Vidya cult. But those who do not have a guru, but are deeply attached to Śrī Mātā, the Divine Mother MĀ, should not be deprived of the opportunity to know the significance of Kāmakalā. Hence, a moderate interpretation is given here. The usage of this Kāmakalā in ṣoḍaśī mantra in an appropriate place will provide early siddhi of the mantra.

323. कदम्बकुसुमप्रिया
She is fond of kadamba flowers, amidst the tress of which She lives (nāma 60). The same nāma appears in Lalitā Triśatī as nāma 11. Lalitā Triśatī consists of 300 nāma-s. This 300 is arrived at by multiplying fifteen bīja-s of Pañcadaśī by twenty. The first bīja in Pañcadaśī is ‘ka’ (क). The first twenty nāma-s begin with this bīja and the next twenty nāma-s begin with next alphabet of Pañcadaśī ‘e’ (ए). Triśatī is considered very powerful as it originates from the Pañcadaśī mantra. There are said to be five types of sacred trees and kadamba tree is one among them. These five sacred trees said to represent the four components of antaḥkaraṇa viz. mind, intellect, consciousness and ego and the fifth being the heart where the soul is said to reside (Some modern interpretations point out that the soul resides within the pineal gland, the gland of divinity). The smell of these flowers is compared to the modifications of the mind.

324. कल्याणी
She is the embodiment of auspiciousness. Kalyāṇa means illustrious, noble, generous, virtuous, good etc. Rig-Veda (ऋनवेद) I.31.9 uses the word Kalyāṇa. The Veda says, “तनूक्र्द बोगध परमनतश्च कारवे तवीं कल्याण वसग ववश्वमोवपषे tanūkrda bodhi paramatiśca kārave tavaṃ kalyāṇa vasu viśvamopiṣe”, where Kalyāṇa is used to mean worthy. The same nāma appears in Lalitā Triśatī as nāma 2. The power of auspiciousness in the form of positive energy can be realised through powerful vibrations.

325. जगतीकन्दा
She is the cause of the universe. The cause for the origin of the universe is attributed to the Brahman. Her Brahmanic stature is repeatedly emphasized in this Sahasranāma through various attributes. She is ‘prakāśa vimarśa mahā māyā svarūpinī’ by which She creates the universe.

326. करुणारससागरा
The ocean of compassion. Karuṇa means compassion, rasa means essence and sāgara means ocean. Compassion is Her natural quality, because She is the universal mother. Lalitā Triśatī nāma 9 is ‘karuṇāmrta sāgarā’, which conveys the same meaning. Śaṇkarā, the great saint has given the following interpretation: “Ocean, without making a move is the cause for rain and the entire universe sustains on this water. A drop of water gets itself detached from the clouds and enters a different plane (leaving ākāś and reaching earth) merely to sustain this universe. The water itself does not get any benefit out of its own action. Such is Her compassion.” This compassion is called the Supreme because, She does not differentiate. As far as She is concerned, all are equal before Her, yet another reasoning for addressing Her as the universal Mother.

327. कलावती
She has sixty four types of arts or She is the possessor of these sixty four types of arts, which have been already discussed in nāma 236 and the interpretation is reproduced here. (She is the embodiment of sixty four types of arts. Kalā means art. There are sixty four types of arts in tantra śāstra-s. No concrete evidence is available either to confirm or dispute these sixty four arts (arts can be explained as either science or art or doctrine. They are all in the form of dialogue between Śiva and His consort Pārvatī. But, these sixty four types of arts originate from aṣṭama siddhi-s (the eight super human powers). Śiva himself tells Pārvatī about these sixty four arts. Saundarya Laharī verse 31 says, “catuḥ-ṣaṣṭyā tantraiḥ sakalm” meaning that the sixty four tantra-s constitute everything. The sixty four tantra-s originate from the Pañcadaśī mantra and culminate in the Pañcadaśī mantra. This is evident from the fact that the same Saundarya Laharī verse says ‘idam te tantraṃ’ possibly meaning the Pañcadaśī mantra that is declared in the next verse of Saundarya Laharī. Since there is no differentiation between Her and the Pañcadaśī mantra, She is said to be in the form of all the sixty four types of tantric arts. These sixty four types of tantric arts are declared to the world by Śiva at the instance of His consort. The difference between nāma-s 236 and 327 is very subtle. The former says that She is in the form of these sixty four fine arts and this nāma says that She has these sixty four types of arts. The difference is between possession and reflection or prākaśa (Self illuminating) and vimarśa (reflecting).

328. कलालापा
Her speech itself is an art. Lalitā Triśatī nāma 156 is also ‘Kalālāpā’. Kalā generally means sixty four types of fine arts. But, kala refers melodious voice. Ālāpa also means speech. This nāma refers to Her melodious voice as art or Kalā. Saundarya Laharī (verse 38) mentions eighteen types of arts “as a result of whose conversation, the maturation of the eighteen arts takes place”. These eighteen arts are interpreted in different ways. The first one says, that the sixteen bīja-s of ṣodaśī mahā mantra, Devi and one’s guru make the eighteen. This is called aṣṭādaśaguṇitavidyā अष्टादशगगणणतववद्या. Another interpretation refers to eighteen types of vidyā-s - śikṣā, kalpa, vyākaraṇa, nirukta, jyotiṣa, candas, Rig Veda, Yajur Veda, Sāma Veda, Atharva Veda, pūva and uttara mīmāṁsā, nyāya, purāṇa, dharma śāstra, Āyurveda, dhaṇurveda, gāndharva and nīti śāstra. This means, that from the melodious speech of Devi, the eighteen vidya-s originate and by attaining these vidya-s a person is able to distinguish between good and bad through the means of his mind.

329. कान्ता
She is beautiful. Nāma 324 discussed about vibration of Her auspiciousness. This nāma says that Her beauty is vibrating and radiating. This is with regard to Her gross form. This nāma also talks about Her Brahman form. Ka means the Brahman and antā means the ultimate. Therefore kāntā also means the Supreme Brahman, the Ultimate (refer nāma 325).

330. कादम्बरीप्रिया
Kādambara is spirituous liquor distilled from the flowers of the Cadamba. The rain water which collects in hollow places of the tree Nauclea Cadamba (botanical name) when the flowers are in perfection and impregnated with honey is known as Kādambarī. It is a type of intoxicating drink. It is one of the five ‘M’s that we have discussed under tantra sastra. In navāvarana pūja (ritual worship of Śrī cakra pūja) a special drink (viśeṣa arghya) is prepared and offered to the Goddess. Generally special drink consists of components of these five M-s - madhya (wine) māmasa (meat) matsya (fish) maithuna (procreation) and mudrā (reckoning of fingers). This sort of worship is called left hand worship. To practice this, one needs to have a masterly guru. In general this practice is not ideal for regular worship and not encouraged. The Supreme Goddesses is known for Her liking for such intoxicating drinks. In reality this does not mean intoxicating drink; but it refers to the ambrosia that is generated when kuṇḍalinī reaches the sahasrāra. Or it could also mean the devotion expressed by Her devotees and She gets intoxicated by such true devotion (refer nāma 118 bhakti-priyā). It is also interesting to note that there are other nāma-s in this Sahasranāma about Her liking for intoxication that convey different interpretations depending upon the context.

331. वरदा
The one who grants boons. In Viṣṇu Sahasranāma nāma 330 is also Varadā. Granting boons is the general quality of all Gods and Goddesses. In certain forms of Gods and Goddesses the right palm is used as a gesture of granting boons. There is a special significance for this nāma. She does not grant boons through Her palms. Her sacred feet give boons. She is kāmadāyinī (nāma 63). Otherwise nāma 83 will not have any meaning. The significance of this nāma is further strengthened by nāma 117. Saundarya Laharī (verse 4) perfectly describes this nāma. It says, “You are the refuge of all the worlds! All gods except you vouchsafe protection to devotees and grant their desires by gestures of their hands. You alone do not show varada and abhaya gestures. It is so because Your feet are by themselves powerful to protect those in the grip of fear and grant more that what is desired for by devotees.” Such niceties describe the ease with which She grants boons. It is also said that She is to be worshipped by concentration (through meditation) on ninth lunar day (navami) when She becomes the giver of boons to all the worlds.

332. वामनयना
Literally this nāma means ‘beautiful eyes’. Vāma also means fruits of action and nayat means leading to. Vāma-nayanā therefore means ‘the fruits of one’s actions lead to Her’, indicating the final liberation. This is substantiated in Chāndogya Upaniṣad in IV.15.2. It says ‘saṁyād-vāma’ (concentration of all good things) which means that one who knows the Self (Her Brahman form as the Supreme Self) becomes a container of all good things. He carries the fruits of good things according to what they deserve (as per their karmic account). The next verse of the Upaniṣad says ‘sarvāni vāmāni nayati’ which means the source of all that is good and pure, indicating the Brahman. The word vāmāni is used in the Upaniṣad to mean the One who carried the fruits of good work to all beings according to what they deserve. He is the support of all that is good.

333. वारुणी मदविव्हला
Vāruṇi is the extract of dates that is allowed to brew and when consumed causes inebriation. By consuming this, She forgets the surroundings and concentrates on Her inner Self (possibly meaning Śiva) is the literal meaning of this nāma. This will be further explained in nāma 878. There is a nāḍi (nerve) called vāruṇi which can be controlled by breath. This nāḍi plays a significant role in excretion of bodily waste. If this nāḍi is brought under control by proper breathing exercises, one will never feel tiredness in the body. Sages keep this nāḍi under their control to cope up with longer duration of meditation. She is said to be in form of this nāḍi. This nāma could not have been conceptualised by any human brain to convey such an intricate meaning, other than Vāc-devi-s.

334. विश्वाधिका
She is beyond all tattva-s. There are thirty six important tattvas commencing from Śiva tattva downwards till pṛthivi (earth) tattva. She transcends all these tattva-s. All the living beings exist because of these tattva-s only. Thirty six tattva-s comprise of basic five elements, four components of antaḥkaraṇa, seven components of māyā tattva and five components of Śiva tattva.

335. वेदवेद्या
She can be known through Veda-s. All the Veda-s lead to the Supreme Reality, the Brahman. Brahman is the embodiment of Veda-s. Kṛṣṇa says, (Bhagavad Gīta XV.15) “By all the Veda-s, I am to be known. …I am the knower of all Veda-s”. Veda-s can be known only through knowledge. In other words, unless one has knowledge, the Self-realization is not possible. Brahman is the essence of that knowledge. There is a difference between Veda-s and Vedānta. Vedānta refers to the teachings of Upaniṣads. Study of Upaniṣads gives the necessary impetus to the knowledge. It is also said that Śrī Cakra has four gates on the four sides and each gate represents one Veda. Knowing Her through Veda-s is called Śuddha Vidya (the perfect knowledge) in contrast to Śrī Vidya that deals predominantly with rituals. No doubt, some good interpretations on Veda-s are available, but the fact is that Veda-s are beyond human interpretation. If one looks at the Veda-s, one may tend to believe that they talk about external fire rituals. In fact they do not. They convey several subtle interpretations and only out of such interpretations, Upaniṣads originated. Upaniṣads do plain speaking and to the point. They make attempts to qualify the Brahman by affirmations and negations. She is in the form of essence of Veda-s. {Further reading on Veda-s: The Veda-s (वेद) are the most important treatise to the humanity. They are in classical Sanskrit language that was widely used in ancient Aryan times. The Vedic verses can be interpreted from various angles like literature, spiritual, religious, grammar, philosophy etc. Though there are interpretations on Veda-s available today, it is doubtful whether they truly convey the intended meaning. This is not because of defective interpretations or lack of efficiency of the interpreters, but mainly due to the abilitie-s of Veda-s to communicate both gross and subtle renditions. A careful reading of Vedic verses reveals that they deal with symbolic separation of bodily organs of the performer and offered to higher energy fields for purification. Veda-s never advocated physical slaying of animals. But it is wrongly interpreted that various organs of an animal are offered as oblations. Veda-s originated from divine commune. For a long time, they were not penned down as the verses and were channeled from a master to his disciples. The sages have chosen the oral path for communication as these verses relied more on orthoepy to prevent any distortions. Most of the texts of Veda-s are in the form of verses. These are called mantra verses and their oral delivery largely depends on phonics and rhythm. There are portions of prose as well and they are known as Brāhmaṇa (ब्राह्मण) passages. These passages explain the procedures for rituals and dwell more on the practical side. There are four Veda-s, Rig, Yajur, Sāma and Atharva (ऋग्, यजरग,् साम, अथवु). The first three are known as trividyā (बिववद्या) (literal translation – three types of knowledge). Atharva Veda is not included here because of its late origin. The origin of the other three Vedas is not known. But the fact remains that they defied Nature’s fury and continued to guide even in this contemporary world. Vedas are also known as Śruti-s (िगनत). Veda-s in their original form is too difficult to comprehend as they are considered to have been delivered by God Himself to the ancient sages and saints. The sages conglomerated the speech of God, by colligating their highest level of cosmic intelligence with the Supreme Consciousness. They memorized these verses and imparted them to their disciples orally. If the sages had chosen to contrive the Vedas into manuscripts, they could have been destroyed or modified, unable to stand the vagaries of the Mother Nature. It is beyond the human power to decrypt the speech of God. To make it possible to some extent, the study of Vedas were divided into various categories and each category was analyzed by the experts in the respective fields. This study is known as vedāṅga (वेदाङ्ग) that integrates study of phonetics, ritual injunctions, linguistics, grammar, etymology, lexicography, prosody, astronomy and astrology. The elaborate study of Veda-s would not have been initiated, had it been easier to understand them. Vedāṅga attempted to corroborate various expert interpretations, thereby making it possible to first understand the gross interpretation and later its subtle conveyance. It was concluded that Vedas discuss about every act of a human being, from birth to death. This conclusion was divided into three broad categories known as jñāna, karma and upāsana. Jñāna means wisdom. It is not the knowledge of literacy. This knowledge is known as wisdom. Knowledge is of mundane type, the psychological result of perception of learning and reasoning. Wisdom has the ability to apply knowledge gained for the purpose of practical judgment, discrimination and insight. This is the reason why wisdom is considered superior to knowledge. The Veda-s both directly and indirectly advocate acquiring of wisdom. As wisdom can be acquired only through experience, they prescribe karma-s. Karma-s mean actions. By repeated actions, experience is gained and by such experience, one is able to discriminate between good and bad. Next is upāsana which means performance, performance of rituals. Upāsana differs from karma. Karma means actions for sustenance. Upāsana means actions performed to realize God. The Veda-s give innumerable interpretations to the concept of God. The basic idea of the Veda-s is to make one realize God, which they call as the Brahman. To realize the Brahman, the Veda-s insist that one should be proficient in all the three categories. Therefore, it is made imperative to understand the Veda-s, in their archetypical form, as the verses of Veda-s have deeper implications.}

336. विन्ध्याचलनिवासिनी
She lives in Vindhyā mountains. In Durgā Saptasati (Seven hundred verses like Bhagavad Gīta and is a part of Mārkaṇḍeya Purāṇa) XI.41, She says “I will be born in the house of Nandagopa (father of Kṛṣṇa) and will live in Vindhyā mountains, during which time I will kill these two demons (two demons called Śumba and Niśumba)”. This verse is a definite clue identifying Kṛṣṇa as Lalitāmbikā. This could be the reason for various nāma-s in this Sahasranāma identifying Her with Viṣṇu. There are certain instances where She is said to be the sister of Viṣṇu. In this Sahasranāma, nāma 280 says that She is the sister of Padmanābha, one of many names.

337. विधात्री
Dhātrī means the motherhood. She being (Śrī Mātā) the Supreme Mother, She nourishes this universe. Dhātrī also means gooseberry (Emblica Officinalis or amla) and in this context it is said that She likes gooseberries. This tree is said to be a sacred tree attributed to Goddess Lakṣmī. The lord of creation, Brahma, is known as Vidhātra and his wife is Vidhātrī. The Supreme Śiva in the form of Brahman creates this universe, as Viṣṇu maintains it and as Rudra destroys it. His consorts in these three stages are known as Sarasvatī, Lakṣmī and Rudrāṇī. There are other nāma-s (457, 823, 826, 985) with the same meaning, that come up later in this Sahasranāma. In Lalitā Sahasranāma no nāma is repeated for the second time. But there are certain nāma-s that could convey the same meaning. If one goes deep into each nāma, one can realize that such nāma-s also convey different meanings altogether.

338. वेदजननी
Creator of Veda-s. Literally this can be explained as ‘She gave birth to Veda-s’. Veda-s originated from the Brahman in the form of sound. This sound was realized by the ancient sages and taught to their disciples orally. Only in the recent past, Veda-s are made available in textual forms. More than the text, the orthoepy is important in Veda-s and any wrong recitals or wrong notes (svara) leads to undesired results. This was the reason for teaching Veda-s orally. Veda-s originate from Śabda Brahman (śabda means sound). Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (I.i.5) gives a different interpretation. “There are two categories of knowledge, secular or aparā and spiritual or parā. Aparā comprises of four Veda-s, phonetics, rituals, grammar, etymology, metre and astronomy. But parā is that by which one knows the Brahman, which is ever the same and never decays.” But, Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad (II.iv.10) puts this in a different perspective. “Rig Veda, Yajur Veda, Sāma Veda, Atharva Veda, history, mythology, arts, Upaniṣads, pithy verses, aphorisms, elucidations and explanations are like the breath of this infinite Reality. They are like the breath of this Supreme Self.” Puruṣa-sūktam gives yet another interpretation. It says that ‘the Veda-s originated from sarvahuta yajñā that was conducted by gods and great sages, invoking Puruṣa as the lord of this fire ritual. This Puruṣa is called the Brahman, from whom the Veda-s originated. Even though the interpretations are different, all of them concur that the Veda-s or its subtle form sound, originated from the Supreme.

339. विष्णुमाया
She is the māyā of Viṣṇu. Viṣṇu is all-pervading maintainer of the universe. Brahman’s sustaining act is known as Viṣṇu. Nārāyaṇa Sūktam says ‘Viṣṇu exists both internally and externally (of our physical body)’. Śaktī is in the form of māyā or illusion that forms a sort of veil around the Brahman. Unless the veil is removed, one cannot realize the Brahman and this is the reason why so much importance is attached to Śaktī worship. Śiva has given His independent autonomy (svātantraya śaktī) to Śaktī to administer the universe. Kṛṣṇa says (Bhagavad Gīta VII.14) “It is difficult to transcend my māyā consisting of three qualities (three guṇa-s). Only those who surrender unto me can become free from the clutches of māyā”. This verse of Gita should be considered as very significant. In a single verse Kṛṣṇa explains the concept of māyā and way to overcome it. Māyā is the combination of three guṇa-s viz. satvic, rajas and tamas. Manipulating these gunas cause manifestation. If one is able to transcend these three guṇa-s, the first step of removing the veil of māyā is achieved. The next step is to surrender unto Him. Kṛṣṇa says “māmeva ye prapadyante māyāmetāṁ tarantidya मामेव ये प्रपद्यन्द्ते मायामेताीं तरस्न्द्तद्य.” This means ‘those who surrender unto me certainly overcome this illusion’.

340. विलासिनी
Vilāsa means playful. One interpretation is that She is interested in fun, associated with lusty acts with Śiva. Possibly this could mean that such acts are not considered as sins, as projected. If such acts do not exist, where is the question of procreation? If no procreation is happening, one of the God’s acts, the creation itself will be in jeopardy. Even the ancient scriptures do not advocate abstaining from such acts. But, at the same time they do prescribe certain rigorous rules and regulations that are to be strictly adhered to. Vilāsa also means the power of projection which is called vikṣepa śakti (power of projection, through which the projection of the world is possible). This is the true act of māyā, veiling the Ultimate Truth and projecting It is as something else, thereby causing illusion. This interpretation seems to be appropriate as this nāma follows the earlier nāma Viṣṇu-māyā’. When She is in the form Viṣṇu’s māyā, (Viṣṇu is all-pervading) naturally She causes illusion.

341. क्षेत्रस्वरूपा
Since the next few nāma-s deal with Her Kṣetra form, understanding Kṣetra becomes important. Kṣetra is the physical body and kṣetrajña is the soul. Kṣetra is made up of thirty six tattva-s (some take only twentyfour) or principles. There is an exclusive chapter (XIII) in Bhagavad Gīta on this subject. Kṛṣṇa opens this chapter by saying that “the body is called kṣetra (where karma-s are created and its effect executed) and which cognizes this is called kṣetrajña”. Liṇga Purāna also says ‘the Goddess (Śaktī), the beloved of the slayer of the three cities (Śiva) is Kṣetra while the Lord (Śiva) is Kṣetrajña’. Kṣetra is gross and kṣetrajña is subtle. Kṣetra is perishable, whereas the knower of Kṣetra, kṣetrajña is eternal and imperishable. Kṛṣṇa concludes chapter XIII by saying, “Those who know the difference between kṣetra and kṣetrajña and the phenomenon of liberation from Prakṛti with her evolutes, reach the supreme eternal spirit.” She is said to be in the form of such kṣetra. This nāma means that She is the embodiment of all gross forms of this universe.

342. क्षेत्रेशी
Wife of Kṣetrajña (Śiva) is Kṣtreśī (Śaktī). It is like Bhairava and Bhairavī. It must always be remembered that there is no difference between Śiva and Śaktī. Or it may also be said that She is the Īśvarī of all kṣetra-s (possible extension of the previous nāma).

343. क्षेत्रक्षेत्रज्ञपालिनी
The protector of both kṣetra and Kṣetrajña. She protects both viz. the gross body and the soul. Kṣetrajña-pālinī could mean the protector of the soul or the protector of Śiva. Being Śiva’s wife She has to necessarily protect Him. Being Śrī Mātā or the divine Mother, She has to protect Her children. That is why Śiva is called as the universal father and Śaktī as the universal mother. (Poet Kālidāsa says in his Raghuvaṃśa “jagataḥ pitarau vande pārvati parameśvarau जगतः वपतरौ वन्द्दे पावुनत परमेश्वरौ ।“)

344. क्षयवृद्धिविनिर्मुक्ता
She is beyond growth and decay. These are associated with all mortals. One has to look at the beauty of this nāma. In nāma 341 She was addressed as the gross body, Kṣetra-svarūpā. In 342 She was addressed as Kṣtreśī, wife of Kṣetrajña (Śiva). In the next nāma 343 She was called as the protector of both the Kṣetra and Kṣetrajña (body and soul) and in this nāma Vāc Devi-s address Her as the One without growth or decay, the qualities of the Brahman. Without calling Her as the Brahman She is being addressed by Her various actions. Kṛṣṇa explains soul thus (Bhagavad Gīta II.23): “The soul is never born or dies; nor does it become only after being born, imperishable, eternal and free from birth and decay.....” Bṛrhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad (IV.iv.22) says “It is the controller of all…It does not grow better through good work nor worse through bad work”

345. क्षेत्रपालसमर्चिता
She is worshipped by Kṣetra-pāla-s. Kṣetra, as discussed in nāma 341 is the body. Pāla means the Protector. This body is protected by pañcabhūta (the five elements viz. akash, air, fire, water and earth). Each of these elements is represented by a demigod. She is worshipped by them. This appears to be the appropriate interpretation. There is an interesting story associated with this nāma. Goddess Kālī was created by Śiva to slain a demon called Dāruka. Even after killing him, the ferocity of Her anger could not be controlled. The entire universe was rattled by Her anger. To appease Her anger Śiva Himself assumed the form of an infant. After all She is the Supreme Mother. She started feeding the child (Śiva). While suckling, Śiva also sucked Her anger. This child is called Kṣetrapāla, because He protected this universe from a catastrophe. She was worshipped by this Kṣetrapāla. The place where major yajña rituals take place is also called kṣetra and the god who protects it is called Kṣetrapāla and She is worshipped by him.

346. विजया
She is always victorious. She wins all Her battles against evil doers who are known as demons. It can also be said that She has conquered Śiva’s love, hence victorious. During dasara festival, 10th day evening (known as vijaya dasami, meaning victorious 10th day of dasara festival) twilight time is considered as the most auspicious time to commence any event. There is a tithi nitya devi (worshipped in Śrī Cakra) by name Vijayā.

347. विमला
She is devoid of impurities. Mala means impurities arising out of ignorance. When She is the embodiment of knowledge, there is no question of impurities arising out of ignorance. The same meaning is also conveyed in nāma 135. Vi (वव) as a prefix to a word conveys the opposite meaning of the word. For example, mala means impurities and vi-mala means devoid of impurities. Interpretation for nāma 135 nirmalā is repeated here. Mala means dirt arising out of impure matter. She is without such dirt. In nāma (134) impurity arising out of mind was discussed and in nāma 135 impurities arising out of matter is being discussed. It is to be recalled that mind and matter is Śaktī. Mala is a sense of imperfection that leads to ignorance about the soul and hampers the free expression of the Supreme Self. This ignorance is caused by ego which is called āṇava-mala. This nāma says that if one gets rid of attachments towards matter and by dissolving ego, knowledge is attained. Presence of mala causes avidyā (lack of knowledge) which leads to confusion, dirt and darkness. This darkness etc can be dispelled by meditating on Her, thereby acquiring knowledge.

348. वन्द्या
She is adorable. We adore someone by merely seeing him and without even knowing him. This happens because he draws divine energy from the cosmos and this gets reflected through his body as vibrations. Such vibrations are normally drawn through an orifice in the crown cakra and also through medulla oblongata which is situated beneath the back of our head. The third eye, the pineal gland and the back head cakra are placed in a straight line. When one is able to look within through the ājñā cakra, the energy generated passes through the pineal gland and gets released through the back head cakra and in the process cleanses bio-plasma body. This process not only accelerates one’s spiritual progress but also rarely confers some super human powers (siddhi-s). She is the embodiment of all the energies of the universe. She draws Her energy from the Supreme Śiva and transmits to the universe for its sustenance.

349. वन्दारुजनवत्सला
This can be considered as an extension of the previous nāma. She loves Her devotees like a mother who loves her children. The vibration of love is emanated through one’s body like fragrance of a flower. Because of caring and loving nature also She is known as Vimalā (nāma 347). One can notice this in daily life. When one serves food for his dog, by impulse he develops love for his dog and this is radiated through his body. The dog reads his vibrations and feels his love and wags its tail as a token of reciprocating his love.

350. वाग्वादिनी
She prompts speech or She is in the form of speech itself. Goddess Sarasvatī is referred to as the goddess of speech. This nāma could mean that Sarasvatī acquired the control of speech from Her (like allocation of portfolios in a government). Since She is the origin of speech, She is Vāgvādinī

351. वामकेशी
Wife of Vāmakeśvarā is Vāmakeśī. Śiva introduced twenty eight tantra-s (as per Śaivasiddhānta) to the universe and one among them is called Vāmakeśa tantra. This deals only with Her worship, hence She is called Vāmakeśī. Vāmakā means a man. Śiva is considered as the chief among men (īśvarā), hence He is known as Vāmakeśvarā (vāmaka + īśvarā). His wife is Vāmakeśī. It is like Bhairava and Bhairavi. There are two nāma-s in Lalita Sahasranāma beginning with Vāmakeśa. The first one is this nāma, Vāmakeśī and the other one is nāma 945. Vāmakeśvarī. Vāma has innumerable meanings such as beautiful, splendid, Śiva, Durgā, Lakṣmī, Sarasvatī, a beautiful woman, wife, left side, etc. Keśa means hair. Then this nāma means that She has beautiful hair. But this interpretation does not align well with the preceding and succeeding nāma-s. Nāma 350 refers to Goddess Sarasvatī and nāma 352 could mean Durgā. If these interpretations are correct, then this nāma should refer to Goddess Lakṣmī, which seems to be appropriate. Nāma 945 is Vāmakeśvarī which refers to Vāmakeśvara tantra. This tantra is said to be the sixty fifth tantra apart from the sixty four discussed in Saundarya Laharī verse 31 and nāma 236 of this Sahasranāma. Vāmakeśvara tantra is said to be the most important tantra for Śrī Vidyā worship. This tantra discusses on internal worship of Śaktī. Vāmakeśvarī is said to be the source of this Universe. Śaktī asks Śiva in Vāmakeśvara tantra “Lord, you revealed to me all the sixty four tantra-s. But you have not told me about sixteen Vidyā-s.” Śiva answers by saying that this has not been declared yet and is hidden so far. Then Śiva begins declaring this tantra to Devi. Everything in this tantra has been revealed in a very subtle manner. To cite an example the bīja hrīṁ is declared as the form of Vidyā protecting the self is Śiva, agni, māyā and bindu. Unless one knows the bīja-s of these gods and goddesses, it is difficult to make out the hidden bīj. Śiva bījā is ha, Agni bījā is ra, māyā bīja (root of īṁ ईं or kāmakalā) is ‘ī’ and bindu is the dot. By joining all this, the bīja hrīṁ is arrived. Śiva declares a number of uncommon yet powerful bīja-s in this tantra. Vāma-s mean those who worship Her through left hands. They do not follow the five principle yajñā-s that will be discussed in nāma 946 subsequently. She is the Goddess for these left hand worshippers. She is also known as Vāmeśvarī, which refers to Her divine power which projects the universe out of Śiva (the Brahman without attributes) and produces the reverse (vāma) consciousness of difference. Vāmadevā is the back face of Śiva.

352. वह्निमण्डलवासिनी
She lives in the sphere of fire. Vahni means fire. The sphere of fire is said to be in mūlādhāra cakra and in ākāś or ether. Already nāma 99 mūlādhārika nilaya explained that She resides in the base cakra. The other interpretation that She resides in ākāś is based on the saying that agni prevails in ether as well. Vahni also means numeric three. This numeric three could mean the moon, the sun and the fire one below the other in the spine. The moon is in sahasrāra, the sun in anāhata and the fire in mūlādhāra. She is in the form all these three. The Pañcadaśī mantra consists of three kūṭa-s and this nāma could mean that She resides in this mantra. Possibly this could be the reason why Pañcadaśī mantra is considered as the supreme mantra.

353. भक्तिमत्कल्पलतिका
Kalpa is a divine creeper that grants boon to those who sit under it. In the same way She gives boon to Her devotees. Latika means spread over. This indicates that Her devotees are spread over across the earth (devotees is a general term representing the whole humanity). Kalpa also means imperfection. Those who worship Her with imperfect devotion are made to acquire perfect devotion over several births and She gives them final liberation. There is difference between final liberation and reaching the Heavens which is called mokṣa. The final liberation means no re-birth and mokṣa means after exhausting all good karma-s in the Heaven (the heaven can be explained as a place where certain souls are rested for some period of time). Other souls are reborn immediately after leaving a body. The soul reaching the Heaven, does not attain perfection to become eligible to get liberated. Such final salvation is possible only with Her grace. This is the inherent meaning of this nāma. Kṛṣṇa says (Bhagavad Gīta XV.10) “The yogis striving for liberation see Him existing in themselves; but those who are unpurified and undisciplined are unable to perceive Him even when they struggle to do so.”

354. पशुपाशविमोचिनी
The concept of self-realization is best explained in Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad (I.iv.10). It says “This self was indeed Brahman in the beginning. It knew only Itself as, ‘I am Brahman.’ Therefore, It became all. And whoever among the gods knew It also became That; and the same with sages and men.” When one realizes the Brahman, he becomes everything. Those who do not have the requisite knowledge to know the Brahman are called paśu-s. Paśu generally means cattle; but in the present context it can be explained as the individual soul as distinct from the divine Soul of the universe. In other words, paśu here means those who do not possess knowledge about the Brahman. Pāśa means bondage arising out of ignorance. The cattle need just food and beyond food they do not think about anything, because they are incapable of thinking. That is why those who do not possess wisdom for knowing the Brahman are called paśu-s. Liṅga Purāṇa says paśu-s are the individual souls and pāśa is the bondage and such bondage of paśu-s are destroyed by Paśupatī, the Lord of all paśu-s (Śiva). It is better to know a little more on paśu as this word is more frequently used in many Upaniṣads. Śiva Sutra I.2 says jñānam bandhaḥ. Jñānam means vitiated knowledge and bandhaḥ means bondage. Limited knowledge is ignorance. Ignorance is the cause for bondage that veils the true Brahman. This phenomenon is called āṇava mala. Mala has been explained as ignorance that hampers the free expression of the Brahman. Āṇava mala means innate ignorance of the soul. Āṇava is the word derived from the root aṇu which means the empirical individual. This āṇava mala is subdivided into two. The first one is the ignorance innate in the very being of the individual Self and other is ignorance inherent in the intellect or buddhi. The āṇava mala is the cause of bondage. Those who are afflicted by such āṇava mala undergo birth and death. This nāma says that She removes this āṇava mala for Her devotees, which is a precondition for final liberation.

355. संहृताशेषपाषण्डा
She is referred in this nāma as the destroyer of heretics. Heretics are those who do not follow the principles laid down by Veda-s. Fourteen places (which include the four Veda-s and their extensions are referred to as the principle domains of dharma. Those men who cross the boundaries of the principles of dharma are called pāṣaṇḍa or heresy. She destroys all those who act against the principles of Veda-s.

356. सदाचारप्रवर्तिका
She removes the innate ignorance of the soul to realize the Brahman. In this nāma, She is said to induce the ignorant men to perform noble acts. Sat refers those who perform noble deeds and ācāra means the righteous acts performed by them. She makes the ignorant people (ignorant means lack of knowledge of the Brahman. It could also mean the concept of duality) to pursue the righteous path to realize the Brahman. The principles of righteousness are expounded in epics. These principles form the basis of dharma śāstra (refer previous nāma).

357. तापत्रयाग्निसन्तप्तसमाह्लादनचन्द्रिका
Ancient scriptures talk about three types of afflictions, pertaining to body, elements and deities. These three are compared to three types of fires. These three types of fires cause serious damage to the one who undergoes the sufferings of bondage called saṁsāra. She is like the moon light (grace) that gives happiness to those affected by the said three afflictions. The meaning of the nāma is that by Her sheer grace She destroys the miseries caused by these three afflictions and showers happiness to Her devotees. The three types of miseries are: 1. ādhyātmika – this comprises of the four components of antaḥkaraṇa, five karmendriya-s and five jñānendriya-s. 2. ādhibhautika – comprises of five basic elements and sense organs. 3. ādhidaivata – influence of super human powers. All the three are called afflictions because they function on the basis of data provided by the sense organs. Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad (IV.iv.25) says, “That great birthless Self is un-decaying, immortal, undying, fearless...”

358. तरुणी
She is eternally youthful. Eternal youth is possible only in the absence of modifications, an exclusive quality of the Brahman. The Brahman is non-decaying and immortal said Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad. The eternality of the Brahman is discussed in nāma-s 136, 292, and 344.

359. तापसाराध्या
She is worshipped by ascetics. The ascetics are highly respectable as they abstain from all pleasurable objects in order to seek the Supreme Brahman. They do not worship demigods or goddesses as their only aim is to realize the Ultimate Reality. Worship by such ascetics goes to confirm that She is the Brahman. There is yet another interpretation. Tāpa means bondage which is the root of all miseries. Sārādhyā is split into sāra (essence) + ā (deep) + dhyā (dhyān or meditation). The bondage arising out of saṁsāra can only be removed by meditating on Her. Through the essence of deep meditation, bondage can be removed.

360. तनुमध्या
She has slender waist. Please refer nāma 85 also. There is a meter by name tanumadhya. Meter or chandas refers to the number of alphabets or words in a verse as per Sanskrit literature. She is said to be in the form of this meter. Kṛṣṇa says, (Bhagavad Gīta X.35)” Gāyatrī candasāmahaṁ (गायि चन्द्दसामहीं)” that He is in the form Gāyatrī meter.

361. तमोऽपहा
Tamas means ignorance and its main components are mental darkness, ignorance, illusion, error. Tamo guṇa is one of the three guṇa-s. An ignorant person is said to have tamo guṇa. There is a beautiful explanation for ignorance or darkness in Īśā Upaniṣad (verse 9). “Those who mechanically perform rituals go into darkness which is like being blind. But, those who merely worship God go into deeper darkness”. Mundane worship never gives result. Any worship for material prosperity or personal upliftment will never be rewarded. Such men are called ignorant. She is said to remove this ignorance.

362. चितिः
She is in the form of eternal knowledge. Cit can be explained as pure knowledge that helps in realizing the Brahman. The opposite of cit (vidyā) is nescience (avidyā or ignorance about the Brahman). Her vimarśa form is discussed here. Brahman has two forms prakāśa or the static and self illuminating energy and vimarśa or the kinetic and reflecting energy. The one without the other is not capable of sustaining this universe and this interdependency is called as the union of Śiva and Śaktī. {Further reading on cit: Brahman is the essence of sat (eternity), cit (pure or foundational consciousness) and ānanda (the bliss). Cit is also known as spiritual conscience, which is also known as citātma. When citātma is reflected in universal nescience, it assumes the role of God. When citātma is reflected in individual nescience the role assumed as the individual souls. Both God and souls are nothing but mere reflections of purest form of consciousness of the Brahman. But there is a distinction between God and soul. God is the Lord of prakṛti and soul becomes liable to the bondages of prakṛti.}

363. तत्पदलक्ष्यार्था
Tat means that and pada means word. Tatpada (that word) means THAT referring the Brahman. Lakṣyārthā means indirect reference. Tat-tvam-asi or you are That is said to indicate that you are the Brahman where ‘That’ refers to the Brahman. This goes to prove the omnipresence nature of the Brahman and His non-dualistic nature. The previous nāma discussed about the two forms of the Brahman. Prakāśa form is without attributes and is eternally pure and vimarśa form is with attributes and though pure is subjected to modifications exclusively for the purpose of administering the universe. Though they are interdependent, in literal sense there appears to be no difference between these two as they are embodiments of pure knowledge or cit. In fact this undifferentiated form of the Brahman is known as That or Cit. In order to avoid any confusion arising out of the previous nāma, this nāma confirms Her nir-guṇa (unconditioned) Brahman status.

364. चिदेकरसरूपिणी
She is the essence of knowledge. The difference between knowledge and the essence of knowledge is to be understood. The knowledge of the unconditioned Brahman or the Prakāśa form of the Brahman is different from the conditioned Brahman or the vimarśa form of the Brahman. The Brahman with attributes and without attributes remains the same, so also their purity of knowledge. This is the reason for establishing the identity of the both as one. This nāma says that She is not different from Cit (nāma 362) or That (nāma 363), the qualities of the Brahman. There is no difference between conditioned and unconditioned Brahman as any modifications take place purely at the will of Brahman for the purpose of creation, sustenance and dissolution. When knowledge is extracted, the essence of knowledge is obtained, possibly from its gross form to its subtle form. But, the foundational nature of both gross and subtle forms of knowledge is not different. This can be compared to milk and its derivatives. Svātmānanda-lavī-bhūta-brahmādyānanda-santatiḥ

365. स्वात्मानन्दलवीभूतब्रह्माद्यानन्दसन्ततिः
The sum total of bliss of Gods like Brahma and others is only a droplet of Her bliss. All gods and goddesses enjoy the ānanda or bliss. Brahma and other gods indicate the three actions of the Brahman viz. creation, sustenance and dissolution. Every action of the universe is said to be controlled by a form of god or goddesses. For example Brahma is said to be in charge of creation, Viṣṇu for sustenance and Rudra for destruction, Varuṇa for waters, Agni for fire, etc. But what is bliss? Our real nature is always in the state of bliss or happiness or ānanda whatever you call it. But this perennial nature of bliss is disturbed by the powerful tools of desire and associated losses. Desire is always for the one that one does not possess and loss is a situation where, what one had earlier is not with him now. Taittirīya Upaniṣhad (II.8) beautifully describes bliss. “To give the idea of bliss that Brahman represents, take a young and honest man with a commanding personality, well versed in the scriptures, well built and strong. Suppose he owns the wealth of the entire world, then take his maximum stage of happiness as one unit and multiply it with infinity, is the bliss of the Brahman”. In the next verse, the Upaniṣhad says “…being free from desires, he first attains the self represented by the vital breath, then the self represented by the mind, then the self represented by the intellect and the self represented by bliss and finally merges into the cosmic self or the Brahman”. The bliss is the penultimate stage of the final salvation. Such a sort of bliss can be experienced only during the last stages of merger into the Brahman, the final stages of liberation, the state of kaivalya. This nāma is in confirmation of nāma 363 which says that she is in fact the Supreme Brahman or the Brahman without attributes.

366. परा
In the next few nāma-s Her Śabda (sound) Brahman form is going to be discussed. The literal meaning of ‘Brahman’ is growing, developing, swelling, expanding, evolving etc. This nāma refers Her un-manifested form (of the Brahman). In order to understand this nāma and the next few, origin and evolution of sound becomes a necessity. Prakāśa and vimarśa form of the Brahman are quite frequently referred to while discussing the Supreme Reality or the Absolute. Generally it is to be understood that prakāśa form represent Śiva and vimarśa form represent Śakthī. Śiva or Parameśvara (parama means the highest) is pure and unblemished self-illuminating light and Śakthī or vimarśa is the realisation of this pure light. Prakāśa and vimarśa cannot be separated. There is a Sanskrit saying that word and its meaning cannot be separated; in the same way Pārvatī or Śakthī and Parameśvaran or Śiva cannot be separated from each other. When there is a brilliant light, one needs to have knowledge to realise it as light. Suppose, there is a candle burning, and on seeing the candle with light, one can say that the candle gives light. When one wants to see a candle light, he needs to have a lighted candle. The light and its visibility though separate, are interdependent. Visibility is the expression of light and without the source of the light, visibility becomes impossible. In the same way, light is of no use, if it is not reflected making the visibility possible. Both light and its expression together is known as light. This is called prakāśa vimarśa māyā or the Absolute. Sound originates from this Absolute form. This Absolute form is also called parāvāc form. This parāvāc is primeval stage. The sound in this stage can be called as a seed that has not yet germinated. When the seed begins its germination, the stage is called paśyantī (nāma 368). At this stage the seed has the desire to grow. The stem becomes visible and the seed is set to commence its journey of growth. Though it is known for certain that there is going to be a tree at a future date, one does not know how the tree would be, big or small, fruit bearing or barren etc. When the sapling grows to a certain height, one is able to see its leaves, he will be able to identify what type of tree that would be. This stage is called madhyamā (nāma 370). The sapling further grows to become a tree, when one is able to see its flowers and fruits. He is able to recognize the nature of this seed totally now. The complete form of the tree is known at this stage. This is called vaikharī stage. These three stages originated from the form of the Absolute, the seed in this example. Absolute form is called as parāvāc. Parā mean the highest form or the supreme form and vāc means sound. Parāvāc means the supreme form of sound. From this parā form or the seed form sound germinates, grows and yields words. The result is a full word with meaning. In a human being this parāvāc is said to be in the form of kuṇḍalinī (nāma110) energy posited in mūlādāra cakra or base cakra. From the base cakra, the seed of the sound begins its ascent, reaches manipūraka cakra or navel cakra in the form of paśyantī, moves to anāhat cakra or heart cakra in the form madhyamā and reaches viśuddhi throat cakra as vaikharī where the final cleansing takes place. From the throat cakra the physical form of words are delivered. The vibration of kuṇḍalinī energy is the seed of the sound. When a desire of speech arises, it manifests as Śabda Brahman at mūlādhāra and moves up to take a physical form and delivered through throat cakra in the form of vaikharī. Śabda Brahman is the Brahman in the form of sound. Like universe manifesting from the Brahman, words originate from Śabda Brahman. In reality, these two Brahman are not different. To understand this better, we have go back to the creation. In terms of Sāṁkhya philosophy, the creation is based on twenty five tattva-s or principles (against twenty four tattva-s normally considered). The addition here is Īśvara tattva. These twenty five principles are 1. Puruṣa (the individual soul), 2. Prakṛti (nature), 3. Buddhi (intellect), 4. Ego, 5-9. Jñānendriya-s (cognitive senses, like ear, nose, etc), 10-14. Karmendriya-s (action senses like legs, hands, etc), 15-19. Tanmātra-s (subtle primary elements like taste, smell, etc), 20-24. Mahā bhūta (five basic elements like ākāś, air, etc) and finally as 25th tattva, Īśvara. Here Īśvara means the Brahman and puruṣa means the individual soul that gets various shapes and forms. The concept of Brahman is beyond all the other twenty four tattva-s. Puruṣa and Prakṛti both are aboriginal principles, but there exist certain differences between them. Puruṣa is known as jīva-ātma or the individual soul which is a conscious spirit with positive principle. Prakṛti is unconscious matter with negative principle. When puruṣa interacts and conjoins with prakṛti (opposite energies are attracted to each other), the prakṛti manifests into other twenty one tattvas and binds the puruṣa or soul into subtle and then to gross matter. The gross matter is the physical form of man and subtle matter is antaḥkaraṇa a (mind, intellect, consciousness and ego). The stage before this union is called avyakta (nāma 398) or un-manifested form. In the stage of avyakta, when modifications in the form of manifestation is about to happen, māyā spreads its veil depending on the karmic density of the soul. This is how the creation is explained in the scriptures. This un-manifested form or avyakta is called kāraṇa bindu because it is smaller than an atom. Bindu means a dot and kāraṇa bindu means origination of cause. When the time is ripe for kāraṇa bindu to manifest, it pulsates and vibrates getting ready to manifest and this gives rise to another dot called kārya bindu or effect dot, where the cause is manifested as effect. From this effect-dot or kārya bindu, arises another dot called nāda bindu or sound-dot. The sound is ultimately delivered through nāda bindu after undergoing further refinement. The kāraṇa bindu resides in mūlādhāra cakra and during it’s ascend undergoes these modifications and delivered in the form of audible sound. Parā has three stages. Its original parā form is considered as supreme and is full of energy. In order to manifest, it gradually loses its supremacy and energy level and becomes parā-parā the mediocre level of supremacy. It further loses its strength at the exact time of manifestation and becomes aparā where it loses its supremacy and become manifested. These three stages are known as Śiva, Śaktī and nara (man). This way also She is known as parā. As the subsequent nāma-s discuss further about the evolution of sound from its parā or supreme form, therefore contextually this nāma is to be considered from the angle of Śabda Brahman only. Rig Veda (I.164.45) also discusses this modification and it says, catvāri vāk parimitā padāni tāni vidurbrāhmaṇā ye manīṣiṇaḥ | guhā triṇi nihitā neṅgayanti turiyaṃ vāco manuṣyā vadanti | | चत्वारर वाक्पररलमता पदानन तानन ववदब्रगाुह्मणा येमन वषणः | गगहा बिणण ननदहता नेङ्गयस्न्द्त तगररयींवाचो मनगष्या वदस्न्द्त | | “Four are the definite grades of speech; those learned who wise know them; three deposited in secret, indicate no meaning; men speak the fourth grade of speech. Four grades of speech are – ॐ, Bhūḥ Bhuvaḥ Suvaḥ and these are known as Parā, paśyantī, madhyamā and vaikharī. Parā is the innermost at the origin; paśyantī pertains to heart, madhyamā to intellect and vaikharī the phonetically expressed through organs of speech.” This nāma refers to Her parā form.

367. प्रत्यक्चितीरूपा
Pratyak means turned towards the inner soul and cit means consciousness. She is in the form of inner consciousness which is known as inner Self. Pratyak is opposed to parāk, which means turned outwards that happens with the help of senses. Inner consciousness is considered as the supreme level of consciousness. Life energy interacts with internal awareness, paving way for higher level of consciousness. The lower or higher level of consciousness purely depends upon the purity of the mind. Purity of the mind depends upon the level of usage of sensory organs. Looking within means, the process of interaction between life energy or prāṇa with consciousness or cit. This is called the Supreme Self or the Brahman in un-manifested form, which is the essential nature of the Brahman. When She is referred to as the inner consciousness, it means Her un-manifested Brahman form, discussed in nāma-s 397 and 398. This is beautifully explained in Katha Upaniṣad (II.i.1) which says “The Self-created Lord has created the sense organs with the inherent defect that they are by nature outgoing. This is why beings see things outside and cannot see the Self within. Rarely is there found a wise person seeking immortality, who can withdraw his sense organs from external objects to the Self within.”

368. पश्यन्ती
Nāma 366 said that paśyantī is the second stage in the evolution of sound. The union of Śiva and Śaktī is the primary stage of sound which is called parā. This primary stage leads to the next stage called paśyantī where the first differentiation begins to appear in the process of evolution of speech. In this level, the sound becomes more perceptible but continues to be inaudible, though not yet isolated. The previous nāma suggested that one should look within to explore the inner consciousness. But what happens if inner consciousness is explored? It leads to the beginning of differentiation in the form of visionary wherein the Self begins to realize all others as its own. This nāma says that She is in this form of speech. The concept is that She is the beginning and end of speech. It can also be said that speech originates and dissolves in Her.

369. परदेवता
She transports power to other gods and goddesses, meaning that She is the supreme amongst gods and goddesses.

370. मध्यमा
The next higher level of paśyantī is madhyamā. This stage is called intermediary stage between the origin and the end of speech. Here the duality begins to appear. This is the stage where the individual consciousness, the psychological result of perception, learning and reasoning, where the mind develops capacity to analyze and differentiate has not reached the empirical level. At this level, intellect, one of the components of antaḥkaraṇa begins to influence the consciousness which is in the impersonal stage of development. This is a stage where one can talk to himself. Mantra-s are chanted and recited in this stage only. This is because, while reciting mantra japa-s, only the inner Self alone should listen to the mantras and not anybody else, not even one’s etheric body. In this stage only the uttering self alone can listen to the sound. Whisper develops from this stage. Step by step of Her manifestation in the form of sound is discussed in these nāma-s

371. वैखरीरूपा
Vaikhari is the fourth and final form of sound in its evolution. This is the state wherein the sound is heard. This is called vaikhari because the sound is produced by a modified form of prāṇa called vaikihari. This is the stage which is called aparā or non-supreme stage in the evolution of sound where there exists fully developed materialization, combined with time and space, the components of māyā. In fact the theory of evolution of speech purely depends upon the materialistic treatment of prāṇa or life energy. The whispering sound in the stage of madhyama fully transforms into speech and delivered in the form of vaikhari. It is said that will (icchā) forms the basis of speech to finally merge with consciousness. Importance of consciousness is repeatedly emphasised.

372. भक्तमानसहंसिका
There is a small story about associated with this nāma. Brahma, the God of creation created a lake called Mānasarovar at the top of mount Kailāsa. The water in this lake is known for its highest purity. The lake exists even today. Swans always prefer purity and hence flock around this lake. The lake is compared to the mind (which has to be pure) and the swans (normally a pair of swan) are compared to jīvātma-s (souls) and Paramātma (the Brahman)} are compared to Lalitāmbikā. This story says that Brahman has a great liking for a pure mind and chooses to stay there forever, guiding the aspirant from within. Saundarya Laharī verse 38 provides further information on this nāma. In Hinduism, highly evolved souls are called paramahaṃsa-s (a religious man who has subdued all his senses by abstract meditation) which refers to the qualities of swans. The swans have a few exceptional qualities. If water and milk is mixed, swans consume only the milk leaving water alone. This is interpreted as that one should take cognizance of only good things, leaving bad things aside, though the world exists as the mixture of the two. Whenever swans are mentioned, they are always referred to in pairs, out of which one represents sense of hearing and another sense of seeing. Out of all the senses, only these two cause serious erosion of moral values. Like swans one should take notice of good things in life. That is why She is referred as swan. Nāma 816 is muni-mānasa-haṁsikā.

373. कामेश्वरप्राणनाडी
She is the vital force of Kāmeśvara, the Supreme form of Śiva. This nāma is taken from Veda-s. Śrī Rudraṁ says (Yajur Veda IV.v.10) “Oh! Rudra! We invoke the auspicious form of yours, that is auspicious and ever healing along with the great auspicious form of Śaktī”. Saundarya Laharī (verse 28) also speaks about the importance of Śaktī in sustaining Śiva. Śiva swallowed the dreadful poison that was formed while churning the ocean of milk. It was due to the auspiciousness of Her ear ornaments, Śiva was saved from the disastrous effects of that poison. The point driven home here is that the eternal Śiva cannot function without Śaktī and by the effect of Her māyā the universe exists today. That is why She is called the life energy of Śiva

374. कृतज्ञा
She is aware of all the actions of the universe. She is capable of transcending the secrecy or privacy, which ignorant men think that nobody is capable of hearing or seeing (recollect those two swans). There are nine witnesses to all our actions. They are sun, moon, the lord of death (Yama), time (kala) and five basic elements ākāś, air, fire, water and earth. All these nine are under the control of Śaktī and that is why She is said to be the witness to all the actions of the universe. This can also be interpreted as ‘she is the one who imparts knowledge’. In other words when one performs his karmas without expecting anything in return, pleased with his selfless nature, She imparts the Supreme knowledge (knowledge of the Brahman). In Viṣṇu Sahasranāma 82 is Kṛtajñā. Cāndogya Upaniṣahad (IV.iii.8) says, Prāṇa, speech, the eyes, the ears and the mind – these five represent our physical self (ādhyātimka). Air, fire, sun, moon and water represent Nature (ādhidaivika) that surround us. The ten together are to the dice throw called kṛta. It is also said that ādhyātimka and ādhidaivika together represent the universe and hence is known as Virāt (the Supreme Intellect located in a supposed aggregate of gross bodies). Living beings are known as ādhibautika. In terms of Cāndogya Upaniṣahad (IV.i.4) Kṛtajñā means a person who includes within himself all the good things that other people do. He is the sum total of all good things in the world.

375. कामपूजिता
She is worshipped by the lord of love Manmatha. We have seen earlier that She is worshipped by twelve gods and godlessness, sages and saints through Her supreme Pañcadaśī mantra and Manmatha is one among the twelve (refer nāma 239). Manmatha is also known as Kāma and the worship by Kāma is called Kāmapūjitā. 586th nāma is Kāma-sevitā. There is yet another interpretation. In Śaktī worship there is a reference to fifty one holy places (Śaktī pīṭha) that are considered sacred. But internally, there is a reference to four places called kāmagiri pīṭha (this nāma), pūrṇagiri pīṭha (next nāma), jālandhara pīṭha (nāma 378) and oḍyāṇa pīṭha (nāma 379) corresponding to base cakra, navel cakra, heart cakra and throat cakra. Sound evolves from the base cakra undergoes refinement and delivered as speech through the throat cakra. The four pīṭha-s referred above represent Parā, paśyantī, madhyamā and vaikharī. This has already been discussed in nāma-s 366 to 371.

376. श‍ृङ्गाररससम्पूर्णा
She is in the form of essence of love. Previous nāma discussed about four pīṭha-s and in particular the previous nāma referred to kāmagiri pīṭha or mūlādhāra cakra. In this nāma a reference is being made to the pūrṇagiri pīṭha or the navel cakra. The previous nāma made a reference to kāmagiri pīṭha. Parā vāc that originated from the mūlādhāra cakra or kāmagiri pīṭha, enters the next phase of evolution at the navel cakra or this pūrṇagiri pīṭha. The dot which was known as kāraṇa bindu at the navel cakra-s becomes kārya bindu in this cakra. Details of these bindu-s have been been discussed in nāma 366. Lalitāmbikā is said to be the embodiment of extracts (rasa) of finer things in life. There are said to be eight to ten types of rasa-s, though only nine types of rasa-s are generally mentioned. These ten rasa-s are love (śṛṅgāra), heroism, disgust, anger, mirth, fear, pity, amazement, tranquillity and warmth. Saundarya Laharī (verse 51) refers to eight types of rasa-s that She exhibits at different times. She exhibits the essence of love with Śiva, heroism while destroying evils, disgust while dealing with ignorant, fear on seeing the snakes on the person of Śiva, anger with goddess Gaṅgā (as Śiva holds her in His hair), amazement on seeing Śiva’s third eye, warmth while being with Her true devotees and lāsya rasa (expressing emotions as if dancing) while looking at Her attendants. This nāma talks about the essence of love that She exhibits while being with Śiva, all alone. The love between Śiva and Śaktī is beautifully described in various scriptures. The essence of love or śṛṅgāra-rasa is the cause for other rasa-s. Though these narrations go well while visualizing Her form, Her Absolute form is beyond all these qualities and attributes There is one more interpretation for this nāma. Śṛṅgāra means primary, arara means veil, sampūrṇa means the Brahman. If interpreted this way, then it means that She is in the form of pure Brahman nirguṇa Brahman and also in the form of the Brahman with attributes (māyā form). It is also said that pūrṇagiri pīṭha is referred in this nāma.

377. जया
She remains victorious. She is the embodiment of victory. Possibly this could also indicate that Her victorious form can be realized only if one wins over his senses. Senses are considered as the worst enemies to Self realization as the mind gets corrupted due to their evil influence. But, if the mind is conditioned, such evil influences will not cause any affliction to its serenity. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma 509 is Jayā and the interpretation given is ‘the one who wins over all lives’.

378. जालन्धरस्थिता
A reference is invited to jālandhara pīṭha or the heart cakra, where the sound is further refined, to become madhyama, the penultimate stage of sound before its actual delivery. This is one of Her Śabda Brahman forms.

379. ओड्याणपीठनिलया
She abides in the oḍyāṇa-pīṭha, the fourth pīṭha of the gross body. The fully developed sound at this stage is delivered in the form of vaikari. The oḍyāṇa-pīṭha, corresponds to the throat cakra or viśuddhi.

380. बिन्दुमण्डलवासिनी
She dwells in the bindu maṇḍala. The bindu is the central dot of Śrī Cakra where She resides along with Her consort Kāmeśvara. This point of Śrī Cakra is considered as the most powerful point because it is the abode of both Kāmeśvara and Kāmeśvarī. The bindu is also referred to the orifice in the sahasrāra also known as brahmarandhra through which commune with God is established. The cosmic energy enters the human body only through this orifice in the crown cakra and medulla in the back head cakra. When these two places are exposed to Mother Nature and early morning sun, sufficient cosmic energy can be drawn by the gross body to have a disease free life.

381. रहोयागक्रमाराध्या
This nāma and the next one discuss about worshipping Her secretively. Secretive worship means worshipping Her internally without resorting to external rituals. Worshipping Her within is considered as a powerful tool to realize Her, as only Her subtlest forms can be worshipped within. Her subtlest form is Her kuṇḍalinī form. In sahasrāra or the crown cakra, She conjoins with Śiva and worshipping this Śiva-Śaktī union is considered as the secretive worship. Obviously, others cannot partake in this internal worship. The internal worship, be it Her gross form, or Her subtler kāmakalā form or Her subtlest kuṇḍalinī form attains great importance. In the external rituals, the sādhaka or the practitioner is associated with actions. The concentration gets diverted and diffused from the focal point of the worship to the mundane form of the ritual. In the internal worship, the entire focus is fixed on Her and there are no distractions. Though distractions cannot be avoided in the beginning stages of internal worship, when the practice is intensified leading to the stage of bliss, a sort of addiction is developed by the practitioner to be with that bliss. The stage of bliss cannot be described in quotidian language and to understand it, one has to really make sincere attempts while pursuing the path of spirituality. Secondly, the stage of bliss does not vary depending upon the forms of God. Bliss is a unique phenomenon, applicable to all forms of worship. In Śri Vidyā cult, there are two types of worship. One is called samayācāra worship, the internal worship. The other is kulācāra worship or the external rituals. Saundarya Laharī (verse 8) makes a reference to this samayācāra or internal worship. “You are seated in the middle of the ocean of nectar (sahasrāra), with Śiva tattva as the base and Sadāśiva tattva as the cushion, offering bliss. Only the blessed ones meditate on this form of yours” says this verse. A question may arise, being Śiva’s wife how She can sit on a couch with Śiva as its base and Sadāśiva (the higher form of Śiva) as the cushion. In scientific parlance, two objects cannot occupy the same space at the same time. Therefore it becomes possible to interpret that Śiva and Śaktī are no way different from each other. That is why Śiva- Śaktī union assumes great importance. Scriptures also point out, that the state of bliss can be attained, only by those who always remain with Her thought and not by those who solely resort to materialistic living.

382. रहस्तर्पणतर्पिता
In the initial stage of pursuing spiritual path and in order to control the mind, recitation and repetition of mantra-s is practiced, so that the mind does not get diverted to extraneous thoughts. Such mantra-s should be recited after understanding the meaning of the mantra. In the case of Pañcadaśī mantra, there are fifteen bīja-s in that mantra and each bīja has different meaning and significance. This has been dealt with in the introductory chapter. Two things are important while reciting a mantra. The first one is dhyāna verse or the meditative verse that describes the form of the god or goddess. This helps in visualizing the form of the deity. Second is the mantra itself that infuses life to the visualized form. This situation is applicable only in the initial stages and as one progresses, further guidance is received from the concerned deity itself by way of communion. This nāma says that such mantra-s should be recited only mentally. There is another interpretation for this nāma. This nāma could also be interpreted as ‘secretive oblations’ offered into the internal fire (fire generated and persists at the mūlādhāra cakra to keep the body alive). The oblations consist of the thirty six tattva-s or the principles that are responsible for our karma-s, either good or bad. In Śrī vidyā navāvaraṇa pūjā there is one separate ritual called ‘internal oblation’ or tatvaśodhana wherein all the dualities are sacrificed as oblations in the internal fire.

383. सद्यःप्रसादिनी
She bestows Her grace immediately for those who seek Her within. This has been discussed in the two previous nāma-s. By such internal worship, Her immediate grace is imminent.

384. विश्वसाक्षिणी
She is the witness of the universe. This is the unique quality of the Brahman without attributes, the supreme form of the Brahman. Only the Supreme Brahman stands as a witness to the happenings of the universe, without himself partaking in any of the activities.

385. साक्षिवर्जिता
But She is without witness. The existence of the Supreme form of the Brahman cannot be witnessed by anyone, as this form of the Brahman has no known source of origin. Another quality of the pure Brahman is referred here.

386. षडङ्गदेवतायुक्ता
ṣaḍ (six) + aṅaga (parts) means six parts. For every mantra there are six parts and each such part is under the control of a god/goddess called aṅaga devatā-s of the presiding deity. These six parts are heart, head, tuft of hair, arms, eyes and weapons. Before and after the recitation of a mantra, the deities of these parts are worshipped in our bodies by touching the respective body parts with fingers. This is with regard to the external worship. Śiva has six types of known qualities and they are omniscience, completeness, supreme level of consciousness, freedom, everlasting power and infinity. These six are the qualities of the Brahman without attributes or prakāśa form of the Brahman. This nāma says that She is surrounded by these six aṅaga devatā-s. It is important to remember that She is described both as Brahman without attributes or the prakāśa form and as Brahman with attributes or the vimarśa form.

387. षाड्गुण्यपरिपूरिता
She is endowed with six qualities that are considered auspicious. They are prosperity, righteousness, fame, material wealth, wisdom and dispassion. Dispassion because, She will not show any special favours to a select few, transcending the law of karma. She does not encourage favouritism.

388. नित्यक्लिन्ना
Her ever compassionate nature is referred here. This is an extension of nāma 326. karuṇā-rasa-sāgarā. Nitya-klinnā is the name of a tithi nityā devi (third day of the lunar fortnight).

389. निरुपमा
She is without comparison. Brahman is infinite and a person with finite (limited) cannot describe Him. Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (IV.19) says, “There is no way of describing Him. All you can say about Him is that He is what He is”. Śaṃkara says “There is nothing like Him and nothing to which He can be compared. He is one without a second. He is limitless. The only way you can describe Him is to refer to His uniqueness, which is really saying nothing.” There is a story about this concept. Two brothers were sent by their father to a guru to pursue the spiritual path. When they returned, father asked both of them to describe God. The elder brother gave an extensive lecture about God. When the younger one was asked, he kept quiet. Their father said ‘You are not saying anything because, you realized that God is a subject about which nothing can be said without making a mistake’. This is the concept of God. Nobody can describe the Brahman in totality. At the most one can discuss about Him only by affirmations and negations.

390. निर्वाण सुखदायिनी
Nir (freed) + vāṇa (derived from bāṇa, meaning body). When mind is freed from body, it leads to bliss. When higher level of consciousness is reached, physical body is forgotten. When bodily afflictions are dissolved, what is derived is eternal bliss. She confers this bliss to those who worship Her as per nāma-s 381 and 382. This stage is described by Kṛṣṇa “He who is happy within, who rejoices within, he obtains Absolute Freedom or mokṣa. Only that yogi who possesses the inner bliss, who rests on the inner foundation, who is one with inner light, becomes one with Spirit. With sins obliterated, doubts removed, senses subjugated, the sages contributing to the welfare of the mankind, attain emancipation in the Brahman”. (Bhagavad Gīta V.24 and 25)

391. नित्या-षोडशिकारूपा
This is a reference to the sixteen deities representing sixteen lunar days and they are worshipped in Śrī Cakra. The sixteenth deity is Lalitāmbikā Herself. These fifteen deities are said to represent fifteen bīja-s of Pañcadaśī mantra and Lalitāmbikā as the sixteenth deity representing ṣodaśī mantra. ṣodaśī mantra has sixteen bīja-s, the additional bīja being ि ीं(śrīṁ), the Lakṣmī bīja. ṣodaśī mantra is considered as the most powerful mantra of all. This is the mantra meant only for the final liberation. ṣodaśī also refers to a type of sacrifice called agniṣṭoma, a fire ritual where the performer maintains the sacred fire, the offering is the Soma, the deities to whom, the offering is made are Indra and other gods. The number of priests required is sixteen, the ceremonies continue for five days. This is based on strange mantras, full of interpolations, which are not found in Rig Veda, though they are referred in Śrautra Sūtra-s and Brāhmaṇa-s of Rig Veda and also occur in Sāma Veda and Atharva Veda. Both chants and recitations are complex and are considered particularly sacred and powerful. This nāma says that She is pleased with those who recite Her ṣodaśī mantra than performing thousands of fire rituals discussed earlier. During the dark fortnight (waning) of the moon, Lalitāmbikā i is said to be in the sun (Sūrya maṇḍala) and during bright fortnight (waxing) She is said to be in the moon (Candra maṇḍala). It has also been said that those who got initiated in Pañcadaśī mantra should use bright fortnight for perfecting this mantra and those who got initiated in ṣodaśī mantra should use dark fortnight for perfecting this mantra (attaining mantra siddhi). Those who recite Pañcadaśī mantra should practice it in day corresponding to the sun and those who practice ṣodaśī mantra should recite it in the night, corresponding to the moon.

392. श्रीकण्ठार्धशरीरिणी
She has half the body of Śiva. Śrīkaṇṭha is another name of Śiva. Śrī also means poison and kaṇṭha means throat. Since Śiva holds poison in His throat, He is known as Śrīkaṇṭha. Śrīkaṇṭha also means beautiful neck. She has half the body of Śiva. Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad (I.iv.3) describes this condition thus: “He (puruṣa or soul) desired a mate (prakṛti). He became as big as, man and wife embracing each other. He parted this very body into two. From that came husband and wife. This is one- half of oneself, like one of the two halves of split pea. Therefore this pea is indeed filled by the wife. He was united with her. From that men were born.” There is another interpretation for this nāma. The first alphabet of Sanskrit is अ (a) which is also known Śrīkaṇṭha. The first alphabet is said to be in the form of para (nāma 366) form of sound which gets modified into vaikharī (nāma 371) at the time of delivery of speech. Since the first alphabet is considered as half of other alphabets put together, She is known as Śrīkaṇṭhārdha-śarīriṇī. The first letter is also known as śrīkaṇṭhārdha.

393. प्रभावती
She is endowed with the power of effulgence. She is surrounded by eight devi-s each representing one of the aṣṭama siddhi-s. They are very powerful and illuminant and known as aṇimā, laghimā, mahimā, īśitva, vaśitva, prākāmya, prāpti and sarvakāma. These eight devi-s are called prabha. Prabhāvatī is the One who is surrounded by prabha-s. Saundarya Laharī (verse 30) says, “What wonder is there in ārati to the one who constantly meditates on you, surrounded by rays emanating from your feet as aṇimā and others...”

394. प्रभारूपा
The luminous light emanating from Her and was referred to in the last nāma, is said to be powerful in this nāma. These devi-s derived their illumination from this brightness. She is said to be in the form of Supreme light. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (III.14.2) describes this light “He is controlled by the mind. He has a subtle body and He is luminous (bhārūpaḥ).”

395. प्रसिद्धा
She is well known to everybody as She is highly celebrated. She is in the form of inner Self of all living beings. When someone says ‘I’, it actually means Her, as She is the Self.

396. परमेश्वरी
She is the supreme ruler. She is Supreme on two counts, one on Her own and second because of being the consort of Supreme Śiva. Śiva is Parameśvara and His wife is Parameśvarī. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma 377 is Parameśvarā. It is interpreted as the able administrator. Bhagavad Gīta XIII.27 says, “He sees truly who perceives the Supreme Lord (Parameśvara) present equally in all creatures, the Imperishable (Parameśvara) amidst the perishing”.###

397. मूलप्रकृतिः
This nāma provides the reasoning for the previous nāma. She is the Supreme ruler (Parameśvarī) because She is the root of origin. Prakṛti at best can be explained as Nature. It can also be called as māyā. Prakṛti in combination with the individual soul, mind, intellect and ego form the creation. In fact soul has to depend on prakṛti to manifest. Prakṛti holds the three guṇa-s or qualities, sattva, rajas, and tamas and three types of creative actions icchā, jñāna, and kriya (desire, wisdom and action) śaktī. At the time of manifestation of origin of life, the prakṛti beholds the individual soul by its sheer enticing powers of the guṇa-s and creative actions (the powers of māyā or illusion), makes the soul to manifest. The soul on its own is passive in nature and has to purely depend upon the prakṛti to get the karma-s embedded in it to unfold. Prakṛti is said to be the kinetic form of energy. This is also known as māyā or the Brahman with attributes or Śaktī or vimarśa form of the Supreme. Without this kinetic Śaktī, the creation can never take place. Apart from playing a significant role in creation, the prakṛti plays a vital role in sustaining the creation. At the time of origin of the universe, the Supreme Self alone prevailed. When the origin manifests into creation, it first becomes space then air, fire, water and earth. From earth plants, animals, man etc unfolded. This is the teaching of Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II.1). Prakṛti in its un-manifested form is called avyakta (next nāma). This is the state of prakṛti where all the three guṇa-s are found in equilibrium. Any change in this equilibrium of guṇa-s in prakṛti leads to desire, wisdom and action. This in combination with ego and intellect give rise to further creation. Therefore, prakṛti is the root of all creations. This is also known as the Brahman with attributes or saguṇa Brahman. This is also known as prakāśavimarśa mahā māyā svarūpinī or Śaktī. Since Śiva has to totally depend upon this Śaktī for His creative aspect, She is known as the consort of Śiva. Beyond the state of avyakta there is the Brahman without attributes. Katha Upaniṣad says (III.10) “The Self is beyond thought and speech; the eyes cannot perceive it”. The Brahman is the root of all creations as there in nothing beyond that. Śaktī is called mūlaprakṛtiḥ because She is the part of Brahman or the vimarśa form of Brahman, without which creation is never possible. Chāndogya Upaniṣad VI.ii.3 says “The Existence (the Brahman) decided, I shall be many, which refers to prakṛti. Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (I.i.8) also confirms the above statements of Katha Upaniṣad and Chāndogya Upaniṣad. It says, “Brahman grows by penance.” Whatever be the sayings of the scriptures, the root of creation is prakṛti on whom Brahman depends extensively to create and sustain the universe. This the meaning of this nāma. {Further reading on soul and prakṛti: Soul: In the creation of God, there are countless souls (puruṣa-s) that manifest as the living beings. These souls do not undergo any changes at any point of time. They do not have energy and will and are passive in nature. Since it is said to be smaller than an atom, it is not visible even under a powerful microscope. Though clinically the presence of soul has not yet been established, sufficient research is underway to interpret the phenomenon. As the soul is considered as the divine secret, the ultimate result of any clinical study is doubtful. However, elaborate non-clinical studies more or less describe the soul in a unified voice. Soul is considered as the reflection of the transcendental essence of the Brahman. This goes to prove the statement that souls do not have energy and will of their own. This phenomenon of the Brahman – soul concept can be explained like the moon deriving its light from the sun. The light of the moon is illusionary making one to believe that the moon has its own light. However, the fact is that it gets reflected by the light of the sun. Moon is not self illuminating. So, by and large, the soul and the Brahman are not different, though there are certain subtle differences. Probably, the one main difference is the karma. The Brahman is not bound by karma, whereas the individual soul is bound by karma-s. There is another school of thought (The second and most important part of the Mīmāṃsā or third of the three great divisions of Hindu philosophy called Vedānta either as teaching the ultimate scope of the Veda or simply as explained in the Upaniṣad-s which come at the end of the Veda), which advocates that the Brahman takes the form of Ātman or the individual soul, enabling the individual beings to act, but remains unconnected to the actions or to the results of actions. Puruṣa is the term used by Sāṃkhya school of thought (one of the three great divisions of Hindu philosophy and so called either from, discriminating in general, or, more probably, from reckoning up or enumerating twenty-five tattva-s twenty three of which are evolved out of prakṛiti the primordial essence or the first-producer viz. buddhi (intellect), ahaṃkāra (ego), the five tanmātra-s, the five mahābhūta-s (air, fire, etc)and mind and the twenty fifth being puruṣa) and Ātman is the term used by the Vedāntic school of thought. Both these terms refer to the individual soul. The soul continues to exist in a gross body as long as the body functions. Once the gross body ceases to function after death, the soul also leaves the body along with prāṇa which is also known as the vital force. The fate of the soul after death is determined by the law of karma that remains embedded in the soul, wherever it goes. Karma is like a voice recorder in an airplane, where in the results of all the actions and thoughts are recorded. If someone believes that he is doing an action unaware to anybody, he should always bear in mind that his actions are recorded in his karmic account. It is to be understood that karma is the result of various decisions made by the mind that ultimately determines the destiny of the soul after death. That is why pursuing spiritual path and firmly establishing spiritual progress are considered as essential factors in reducing the impact of karma. Karmic account is not only historical but also contains long forgotten evolutionary aspects as well. Therefore, ultimately the soul unfolds its actions in a physical body depending upon its karmic account. In such a situation, the soul does not undergo any change or modification based on the fact that it is a mere reflection of the Brahman or the Supreme Spirit. The soul can manifest only if it is associated with prakṛti. Prakṛti: The soul or puruṣa can manifest only if it interacts with prakṛti, which is also known as the nature or creative self-unfolding act. This interpretation itself will explain the nature of prakṛti. It is only the prakṛti that unfolds the act of creation. When the soul is associated with prakṛti, the latter unfolds first into the subtle nonmaterialistic form and later into the gross form. The gross form can be identified under three broad classifications such as sthūla (gross), sūkṣma (subtle), and kāraṇa (casual). A comparison can be drawn between an automobile tyre and the three types of bodies. An automobile tyre has an outer portion made up of rubber, beneath that lies the tube that holds the air inside. A car cannot run without the effective and coordinated functions of all the three. The outer tyre is the gross body, the tube holding the air is the subtle body and the air that is the inner most and invisible is the casual body. Similarly, without these three forms, existence is impossible. These bodies, in reality, are the reflections of the levels of consciousness. The respective bodies can be recognized only if the consciousness level is modified, refined and purified. Purer is the level of consciousness higher is the level of spirituality and finer is the type of body. These three types of bodies are the reflections of the prakṛti and this reflection is known as māyā or illusion. The gross body reflects the materialistic world, the subtle body reflects the world of vitality and the casual body reflects the casual world. These three stages are realized in the three states of awake, dream and deep sleep. The gross and subtle bodies are the effects of the casual body. The basis of these types of bodies is the casual body, or the casual manifestation of consciousness. In certain schools of thoughts, a reference to another state called the fourth state or turya state is mentioned. In fact, this turya state is to be accepted by all. Only in this state, where the consciousness transcends all bodily afflictions gets purified and becomes fit enough to be called Cit (the Absolute or the foundational consciousness). Māṇḍūkya Upaniṣad (I.7) authoritatively describes this turya state. “Turya is not consciousness of what is happening within. It is also not the consciousness of what is going on without. It is not consciousness of anything in between. It is not the consciousness of all objects simultaneously. It is not unconsciousness either. It is invisible, not susceptible to any kind of usage, not within the reach of any organ of action. It is beyond perception of any organ, beyond thought and not to be indicated by any sound. In it there is only consciousness of the Self and there is a cessation of the world as such. It is the embodiment of peace and all that is good. It is one without a second. The fourth state is turya. Wise people consider this to be the Self. This Self is to be realised”. The Self in turya state is the purest form of consciousness. In this stage, the consciousness remains all alone, without any affiliations. The prakṛti is potentially a powerful tool that binds the soul to manifest in the form of bodies discussed above, just to manifest and unfold the karma-s embedded in the soul. When the soul is under the lustful embrace of prakṛti, the soul that was part of the Supreme Brahman forgets its own nature, and identifies itself with ego. The deceptive and illusionary nature of prakṛti engulfs the soul with all sorts of addictions, afflictions and confusions and makes the soul totally discombobulated. This particular stage of the soul is said to be ignorant or the state of avidyā contrary to vidyā or knowledge. The pure soul now stands veiled by the effects of prakṛti called māyā or illusion.

398. अव्यक्ता
This could be considered as further extension of the previous nāma. Avyakta is the state of prakṛti in its un-manifested form, with the three guṇa-s in equal proportions. Avyakta is the first stage of the Brahman that cannot be explained, as this is the purest form of Brahman, without parentage. This stage is also known as turya or the fourth state of consciousness, the other three being sleep, dream and deep sleep. It is the non-dualistic state, where the Brahman without a second is realized. This stage is explained by Brahma Sūtra (III.ii.23) which says tadvyaktamāha hi (तद््यकतमाह दह). This means “That Brahman is un-manifest”. This is further explained as ‘It is not comprehended through the eye, or through speech, or through other senses. Nor it is attained through austerity or karma. It is imperceptible, for It is never perceived’. When the nirguṇa Brahman (the Brahman without attributes) desires to create, the māyā undergoes modifications and this modified stage of māyā is called avyakta.

399. व्यक्ताव्यक्त-स्वरूपिणी
It is vyakta (manifested) + avyakta (un-manifested) svarūpiṇī. She is both manifested and un-manifested form. Since this form is the first of manifested form, it is called mahat which means great. It is the fundamental tool of the phenomenal universe. This mahat is endowed with supreme knowledge. The undifferentiated prakṛti is mahat. From mahat, further evolution takes place. Vyakta means perishable and a-vyakta means imperishable. The soul-Brahman relationship is cited here. In general, this stage provides happiness and the final salvation. This nāma means the first signs of creation and final liberation are both caused by Lalitāmbikā.

400. व्यापिनी
She is all pervading. Because She is mūlaprakṛtiḥ and avykatā, She is all pervading. She is also called eka elsewhere, because She is the one who is all pervading, the nature of the Brahman.

401. विविधाकारा
She has many forms. All these forms arise out of mūla-prakṛti (nāma 397). She takes different forms while performing different functions. As the creator, She is the Supreme Mother or Brahma rūpa (nāma 265). As the sustainer, She is Viṣṇu rūpinī (nāma 893). As the destroyer, She is Rudra rūpā (nāma 269). As a witness to the total dissolution, She is mahā pralaya sākṣiṇī (nāma 571). This nāma encases all Her forms. As seen above, each of Her acts is represented by a form. She is also addressed as bahu-rūpā in nāma 824.

402. विद्याविद्या-स्वरूपिणी
She is the form of knowledge and ignorance. Vidyā is not just knowledge. It is the supreme knowledge leading to self-realization. Avidyā is the opposite of vidyā. Īśa upaniṣad (11) explains vidyā and avidyā thus; “He who worships gods and goddesses (vidyā) and also performs sacrifices (avidyā) attains immortality by sacrifices (avidyā) and attains bliss by worshipping gods and goddesses (vidyā).” Vidyā is pure knowledge leading to the Brahman or the Supreme Self. Avidyā means ignorance about the Brahman. In the stage of avidyā, one continues to be associated with performing rituals like fire rituals, external worship etc. But when these two (one is the knowledge about the Brahman and second is performing prescribed rituals without attachment to the fruits of actions) are combined, that is performing rituals etc, without any selfish motive and without any attachments to the end result of an action, along with internal search and exploration through meditation, one is said to benefit from both, leading to bliss. But only when avidyā dissolves into vidyā, the final liberation is attained. She is in the form of both knowledge and ignorance. She is the giver of knowledge (path to spirituality) as well as ignorance (delusion). Ignorance about Brahman is caused by māyā. Kṛṣṇa says, (Bhagavad Gīta V.12) “Offering the fruits of actions to God, the karmayogi attains everlasting peace in the shape of Godrealisation; whereas he who works with a selfish motive, being attached to the fruit of actions through desire, gets tied down.”

403. महाकामेशनयनकुमुदाह्लादकौमुदी
Mahā-kāmeśa is Śiva, nayana – eyes, kaumuda – the moon of second half of November and first half of December (the month of Kārttika), kumuda – lotus flower. On seeing Lalitāmbikā, Śiva’s eyes become wide open like lotus flower blossoming when the moon shines. Śiva’s happiness is reflected through his eyes on seeing Her. The moon in the month of Kārttika is said to be bright. There is another interpretation. Kumuda is made up of ku + mud. Ku means inferior and mud means pleasure. Therefore, kumuda means worldly pleasures. Worldly pleasures are always considered as inferior because it ultimately leads to miseries and pains. Lalitāmbikā, being the Supreme Mother, takes pity on those who indulge in worldly pleasures and take them to Śiva for final liberation. This means that She makes them to pursue the spiritual path for ultimate liberation. If Her motherly care is properly understood, anyone can get rid of his difficulties. The only thing that is required from his side, is to realize Her.

404. भक्तहार्दतमोभेदभानुमद्भानुसन्ततिः
She dispels the darkness of ignorance of Her devotees. This is compared to the sun dispelling the darkness when it rises. She being the supreme mother does this out of compassion. The very thought of Her, dispels ignorance. Kṛṣṇa describes this compassion in Bhagavad Gīta (X.11) “Out of mere compassion for them, I, dwelling within their hearts, destroy the darkness born of ignorance by the luminous Lamp of knowledge.” The darkness referred here is born out of ignorance.

405. शिवदूती
She requested Śiva to be Her messenger to two demons. Since Śiva Himself acted as Her messenger or She made Śiva as messenger, She is known as Śivadūtī. Śivadūtī is one of the fifteen tithi nitya devi-s in Śrī Cakra.

406. शिवाराध्या
She is worshipped by Śiva Himself. Śiva by meditating on Her, obtained his Ardhanārīśvara (half Śiva and half Śaktī) form. As a result of meditating on Her, Śiva became the lord of all siddhi-s. These siddhi-s or superhuman powers originate from Her, through Her subtlest kuṇḍalinī form. This nāma conveys this subtle message. Saundarya Laharī (verse 1) says “Śiva united with Śaktī is able to manifest. Otherwise, Śiva does not even know how to pulsate”.

407. शिवमूर्तिः
Her form itself is Śiva. In fact, there is no difference between Śiva and Śaktī. Śiva means auspiciousness. Because She is the embodiment of auspiciousness, She is called Śivamūrtiḥ. Rig Veda says (X.92.9) “With reverence, we present your hymn today to the mighty Rudra, the ruler of heroes, the rapid and ardent deities with whom the gracious (Śivaḥ) and opulent (Rudra) who derives his renown himself, protects us from the sky.” Śiva is full of grace and happiness and considered as the Supreme protector. When She is said to be in the form Śiva Himself, it is considered as a great honour for Her. This could also mean nirguṇa Brahman or Brahman without any attributes. This Sahasranāma ends by saying Śrī Śiva (998), Śiva-Śaktī aikya rūpinī (nāma 999) and Lalitāmbikā (nāma 1000). Śiva also means the liberation and mūrtī means form. The final liberation is attained only by self-realisation which is possible only through knowledge or vidyā. That is why Her worship is known as Śrī vidyā or the supreme knowledge.

408. शिवङ्करी
She dispenses happiness. Śiva means auspiciousness and karī means giver. She does this to Her devotees by dispelling their ignorance called avidyā. When avidyā is dispelled, knowledge is attained paving the way for Self-realization. She is sarva maṅagala māṅgalye (the provider of all types of happiness) says Durgā Saptasati.

409. शिवप्रिया
She is the beloved of Śiva. Śiva is loved by Her. Śiva is dear to Her. Their love is mutual, as otherwise, Śiva would not have given His left vertical half to Her.

410. शिवपरा
Having compared Her to Śiva, now Vāc Devi-s proceed to say that She transcends Śiva Himself. Parā can be explained as follows: Pertaining to the ultimate or supreme as opposed to the immanent here and now aspect of reality which is aparā. Brahman can be conceived from two angles. One is Parā Brahman, the Supreme of the two and other is aparā Brahman, the deficient of the two. The former is devoid of attributes and hence is inconceivable. Since She transcends the stage of Śiva, She is considered as the Supreme Brahman. This is because Śiva becomes inert without Her. That is why She is known as Parā. Knowing Her is parā vidyā or the supreme knowledge. The appropriate interpretation of this nāma is that She reveals the Supreme or Parā Śiva or Paramaśiva to Her devotees. Paramaśiva can be explained as ‘the Absolute, understood as the casual substance for everything apparent’. This explanation is also in agreement with Her prakāśa vimarśa mahā māyā svarūpinī form. Nāma-s 405 to 410 explained Her attributes with particular reference to Śiva.

411. शिष्टेष्टा
Śiṣṭa-s are those who follow the righteousness prescribed by śāstras. Śiṣṭa-s is also explained to mean those who control their senses and knower of Veda-s. Their actions are based on the śāstra-s that are derived from Veda-s. She likes these śiṣṭa-s. Viṣṇu is known for His righteousness. It is also said that one should worship God, as prescribed by their respective orders and not simply by flowers, etc. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma nāma 310 is also Śiṣṭeṣṭā and the interpretation given there to, is that He (Viṣṇu) likes men of knowledge (jñāni). Kṛṣṇa Himself says this in Bhagavad Gīta (VII.17) “Chief among them is jñāni, ever constant and one pointed in devotion. I am exceedingly dear to him and he is exceedingly dear to me”. Kṛṣṇa did not stop with this. He proceeds to say “A man so illuminated is hard to find and such a stage is reached after many incarnations” (VII.19).

412. शिष्टपूजिता
She is worshipped by such śiṣṭa-s referred to in the previous nāma. Jñāni does not worship someone who is not worthy of worship. He will worship only the Supreme Self, the Brahman. This nāma is an extension of the previous nāma which confirms Her Supreme stature.

413. अप्रमेया
She cannot be measured. Brahman alone cannot be measured. Because She is aprameyā, She is worshipped by jñāni-s and śiṣṭa-s. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma nāma 46 is also aprameyā. He cannot be known through senses as He is devoid of qualities such as sound, etc. He cannot be visualized because He is beyond visualisation. He cannot be known through examples because there is nothing to make a comparison (this is based on the simple logic that a rat cannot be compared to a lion though both have four legs, a tail etc.). He cannot be known either by affirmations or by negations as we do not have any basis for such affirmations and negations. But Veda-s and Upaniṣads try to explore (though by affirmations and negations, as the perceptive knowledge can be inferred only by such affirmations and negations only) Him as “That” and says that He exists as self-illuminating light witnessing the activities of His creation. Kena Upaniṣad (I.6) explains this point more elaborately. “Know that alone to be Brahman which the mind cannot comprehend and which yogi-s say makes the mind function. Brahman is not this sense world, which people worship”. The Upaniṣad continues to say “If you think (guru addressing his disciple) ‘I know the Brahman well’ then it is for certain that you know little about the nature of the Brahman. You know only Its manifestation in the individual self, the gods, and the phenomenal world. Therefore, Brahman should still be thoroughly investigated”. But, we need some basic inputs to know Him. This is explained in the next nāma.

414. स्वप्रकाशा
She is Self-illuminating. Brahman alone is self-illuminating and all other illuminating objects like sun, moon, stars etc derive their light only from the Brahman. Only because of this self-illuminating light, we are able to see this materialistic world. This concept is explained in Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (IV.iv.9) which says “revealing His own lustre by His own light”. This is the state where the light is free from everything else, let it be even the five basic elements. He is not afraid of any one, because, there is no one besides Him. Kaṭha (कठ) Upaniṣad says (II.ii.15) “In the presence of Brahman the sun does not shine, nor the moon and stars, nor does the lightning, let alone this fire. When Brahman shines, everything else follows. By Its light all these are lighted”. This nāma also reaffirms Her as the Brahman. {Further reading on Self-illumination: The soul which is also known as jīva when placed in an empirical self, the divine transcendental light ever shines within its glory, but unfortunately hidden from our perception because of our thought constructs. This Selfilluminating light is known as prakāśa form of the Brahman and referred to as Śiva. This is also known as the Supreme consciousness or Supreme light of consciousness. When there is a harmonious synthesis of prakāśa form of Śiva and vimarśa form of Śaktī, manifestation of the universe takes place. Vimarśa form reflects the Self-illuminating light of prakāśa form and the one without the other becomes incapable of causing manifestation.}

415. मनोवाचामगोचरा
The qualities of aprameyā (nāma 413) are now being explained. She is beyond mind and speech. This stage has been explained by Kena Upaniṣad which has been discussed earlier. If She is known as the One beyond the perception of mind, everything else is struck down as they are only intersections of mind. Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II.ix) also explains this situation. “That from which, words come back, they turn away. How can words express the Self? Can that which is finite express the Infinite? No. It is beyond words, beyond thought. The mind also cannot grasp this Brahman. You can think of something that is familiar, that is known to you, but how can you think of something about which you have had no experience at all? Our thoughts are always limited by experience”. This nāma says that She can be realized only through pure knowledge, the knowledge to which we are never exposed to.

416. चिच्छक्तिः
Cit means pure consciousness and the pure knowledge. The Brahman (without attributes or nirguṇa Brahman) is made up of three important aspects. They are sat (perpetual existence), cit (the present nāma – pure form of consciousness) and ānanda (the bliss). These three attributes together is called saccidānanda (सस्च्चदान्द्द) and the Brahman is also known by this name. Saccidānanda means existence (sat), consciousness (cit) and bliss (ānanda). The pure consciousness here means the spiritual consciousness. Only the pure and un-afflicted knowledge is capable of producing spiritual consciousness. {Further reading on Cit. It is also known as cidātma. When this is reflected in universal nescience, it is known as the Īśvara and when reflected in individual nescience it is known as soul. Īśvara is not the Brahman as it is the reflection of universal nescience. There are two aspects to this interpretation. Here, Īśvara is said to be only reflective in nature and not self-illuminating. Self-illumination is the exclusive quality of the Brahman. Secondly, the Brahman can never be associated with nescience. This Īśvara is said to be the Lord of prakṛti or the Nature. When the soul or individual nescience comes into contact with prakṛti, the soul induces evolution of a new physical body, for the karma-s embedded in it to manifest. However, Īśvara remains in an unconditioned form, but the soul continues its conditioned form afflicted by the lower levels of consciousness, which is also known as individual conscience. Īśvara remains un-afflicted by the influence of three guṇa-s and the soul gets influenced by three guṇa-s, leading to creation. Īśvara can be interpreted as the cosmic counter part of soul. Īśvara and prakṛti in combination with other twenty four principles or tattva-s cause the creation. Therefore, we get introduced to a new principle in this nāma that is known Īśvara tattva or the principle of Īśvara in this Sahasranāma. Since Īśvara is said to be the Lord of prakṛti, it can also be called as the aggregate aspect of māyā and the individual souls are aggregative. This principle or tattva of Īśvara is one among the four distinctive states of the Brahman, the other three being avyakta (nāma 398), hiraṇyagarbha (nāma 638). it is within the subtle body. It binds all the constituents of the universe together) and virāt (nāma 778. the universal cosmic form). Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (V.1) also refers to this phenomenon. ‘Para Brahman is higher than hiraṇyagarbha. Knowledge and ignorance are both hidden in Para Brahman. Ignorance is the cause of birth and death, but knowledge leads to immortality. He who controls ignorance and knowledge is separate from both. That is Brahman (pure and without attributes) the supreme’. This nāma says that She is in this form of ciccakti (cit śakti).

417. चेतनारूपा
It is called caitanya, the pure and unconditioned form of consciousness, in its functional state. It can also be explained as the purer form of the preceding nāma. The entire universe emerges from this caitanya that has two sides. The first one is gross and the other one is subtle. The gross form is made up of name and form and the subtle form is made up of mind and its modifications called antaḥkaraṇa (mind, intellect, consciousness and ego). The gross form gives direct experience and the subtle form gives internal experience. In the stage of caitanya, both objective and subjective worlds get formulated as experiences. Her cetana form or caitanya form is also known as Her vimarśa form.

418. जडशक्तिः
She is the power of inanimate energy (jaḍa). Generally, two types of energies are referred to in the process of creation. One is the non-pulsating (inanimate) energy and the other is pulsating energy. Both are creative energies. The latter is also known as dynamic aspect of the Brahman. This nāma discusses on the non-pulsating nature of creation. Inanimate energy or aparā-prakṛti is considered to be of the lower grade when compared to parā-prakṛti or pure energy (nāma 366 is parā). These two forms of prakṛti are the different modifications of māyā or illusion, which forms part of the Brahman. Without māyā, the Brahman on its own cannot function. In nāma 416 She was referred to as Cicchaktiḥ. This nāma refers exactly the opposite of Cicchakti. But the creation is not possible without the combination of Cicchakti and Jaḍaśakti. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (VII.4 and 5) “My manifested nature has eight fold differentiations: earth, water, fire, air and ākāś (ether) in combination with mind, intellect and ego (three of the four components of antaḥkaraṇa). This is my lower nature (aparāprakṛti). But understand that my different and higher nature (parāprakṛti) is the jīva, the self-consciousness and life-principle that sustains the cosmos”. Jaḍaśakti forms part of the saguṇa Brahman (the Brahman with attributes). This saguṇa Brahman uses both inanimate and animate energies for creation. This is based on the principle that two factors are needed to create a third. Jaḍaśakti is responsible for creating the objective world (conscious mind is objective in nature) that is described in the next nāma.

419. जडात्मिका
She exists as the objective world of māyā that has been discussed in the previous nāma. Except the Brahman, everything else is called māyā. When the universe is called as object, then realizing the Brahman can be called as the subject. {Further reading on subject and object: Let us now understand the subject and object concept of the Brahman. What we are not able to see is not an object. If Brahman is object it has to be seen first before realizing. We are not able to see Brahman. Scriptures also never gave any form to Brahman. Secondly anything could be an object except our own self. Why ‘I’ is not called the object because we use our knowledge in realising the Brahman. How do we get our knowledge? We get knowledge from the objects around us. Tree is an object and we gain knowledge about tree by seeing it. We use our sensory organs to gain knowledge. Knowledge is gained out of the objects only. All objects will perish one day as they exist physically. In the same way, if you look at Brahman as an object, He has to exist physically. If He exists physically, he has to perish one day. Brahman is not visible to us nor is he going to perish like all other living beings. This is yet another confirmation that Brahman is not an object. Only for our convenience we make Him as object by defining various forms. But these forms are not without deeper significance which we shall discuss later. On the basis of the foregoing we can conclude that Brahman is not an object. If He is not an object, then is He the subject? Let us find out. Subject is defined as matter for discussion and a cause to experience. Brahman is the subject taken up for discussion and we are waiting to experience the Brahman. Therefore Brahman could be the subject. But we need more proof to confirm this. You call a tree as an object. How do you know it is an object? You are able to see the tree, the object with your eyes. Who is experiencing the vision of the tree? It is you, your sense organ eye experiencing the vision of the tree. So it is you who is experiencing. Does it mean that you are the subject? Possibly yes. You could be the subject. If you are subject, then what is the position of the Brahman? We have been referring the Brahman as the subject. When Brahman, the Supreme is the subject, how can you too be the subject? Does it mean that the subject, you as an individual and the Brahman are one and the same? Does it mean that the knower and the known are the same? Who is the knower? You are the knower. Who is the known? Brahman is the known. How we can call the Brahman as the known? We cannot call him the known at this stage. He can be called as known only after really knowing him. Discussion about the Brahman does not mean that you know him. By these discussions we are only trying to realise the universal existence of the Brahman. The Brahman within you or me or the tree is one and the same as He exists much smaller than an atom.}

420. गायत्री
She is in the form of goddess Gāyatrī or Gāyatrī mantra. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (III.12.1) says “All that exists in this world, whatever there is, is Gāyatrī. It is the word that is Gāyatrī, for the word gives names to all things and it also tells them not to fear.” The Upaniṣad also says that the Gāyatrī mantra protects and saves a person who repeats this mantra. There is a story in Padma Purāna about Gāyatrī which goes like this: When Lord Brahma was performing a fire ritual, He called his wife Sāvitri. She said that she would come with Lakṣmī and other goddesses. Brahma became wild and substituted a cowherd’s daughter (Kṛṣṇa’s dynasty) for his wife. He named her as Gāyatrī. Accompanied by her, Brahma decided to hasten the fire ritual. At that time, Viṣṇu told Brahma to marry her in the gandharva form of marriage (mental union of a man and a woman) and Brahma thus married Gāyatrī. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta X.35 ‘among poetic meters I am Gāyatrī. Kṛṣṇa elaborates in chapter X, verses 21 to 41 ‘His prominent manifestations among the beings, forces and objects that are the causes and the results of His creative, preservative and terminative activities of the cosmos’. Therefore, Gāyatrī is considered as the powerful of all the poetic meters. Lalitāmbikā is said to be in the form of Gāyatrī. The appropriate way of interpretation is that Gāyatrī is one among the multitude manifestations of Lalitāmbikā. {Further reading on Gāyatrī mantra: Gāyatrī mantra is considered as one of the holiest and powerful mantra-s that finds a place in three Veda-s and a few Upaniṣads. The main difference between Veda-s and Upaniṣad is that the former talks about the Brahman and the latter shows the ways and means of realising the Brahman revealed by the Veda-s. In practical applications, Upaniṣads play an important role than the Veda-s as Veda-s mostly talk about mantra-s and rituals. Amongst all the mantras, Gāyatrī mantra is considered as the most sacred one. Let us now understand Gāyatrī mantra. Each mantra is made up of certain number of syllables and a mantra with twenty four syllables is called Gāyatrī chandas. This mantra was first realized by sage Viśvāmitra. He attained enormous siddhi-s by chanting this mantra. The twenty four syllables are placed in three lines or pāda-s and each pāda has eight bīja-s. The mantra proper is preceded by ॐ and then by three vyāhṛti-s. Vyāhṛti-s represent the three types of worlds. (The names of the seven worlds are bhūḥ, bhuvaḥ, svaḥ, mahaḥ, janaḥ, tapaḥ, satyaṁ. The first three are called the great vyāhṛiti-s and recited after ॐ by many, before commencing their daily prayers and are personified as the daughters of Savitṛi and Pṛiśni.) Then follow the Gāyatrī mantra proper. ॐ or praṇava is the first manifestation of Śabda Brahman. Before ॐ could manifest into A, U and M it was in the form of nāda-bindu (un-manifested form of sound), the creative power of the universe. All sounds originated from Śiva’s drum. We have already seen that Śiva is the static energy, originated on His own. Śaktī was created out of this static energy by means of abnormal pulsation. Possibly this is the only instance when the static energy pulsated. The pulsation of Śiva manifested as Śaktī and from Śaktī all other manifestations such as prakṛti originated. From prakṛti, five elements originated. This is how the creation was commenced by the Supreme Śaktī, in her vimarśa form. From the nāda-bindu (Śiva and Śaktī combine) three syllables A, U and M originated, representing various triads. These are Brahma, Viṣṇu and Rudra (one of the forms of Śiva is Rudra and this Rudra should not be confused with ekādaśa (11) Rudra-s); creation, sustenance and dissolution; past, present and future and desire, knowledge and action. Thus the Gāyatrī mantra begins with OM, the original manifested sound of the Brahman. Next to praṇava are three vyāhṛti-s bhūḥ, bhuvaḥ and svaḥ. These vyāhṛti-s represent further manifestation of OM and this manifestation is called origin of speech and said to represent the three worlds of this universe. These three worlds originated from the three letters A, U, M of OM or अ, उ म of ॐ. From these vyāhṛti-s , was derived the Gāyatrī mantra. Gāyatrī mantra is the origin of three Veda-s (Rig, yajur and Sama Veda-s). Three loka-s or worlds mean the three stages of consciousness. Bhūr means the lower level of consciousness and lower planes. Bhuvar means the ordinary or normal level of consciousness that is associated with our day to day activities. Svar means higher level of consciousness. Thus, the three vyāhṛti-s in fact mean the modifications in the level of consciousness. Three loka-s are also commonly enumerated, viz. heaven, earth, and the atmosphere or lower regions. Bhūr-loka, the earth; Bhuvar-loka the space between the earth and sun inhabited by sages and saints; Svar-loka, Indra's Heaven above the sun or between it and the polar star. After OM and three vyāhṛti-s, the famous Gāyatrī mantra of twenty four syllables are placed. It has three pāda-s or lines. The first line of eight bīja-s is tat saviturvareṇyaṁ तत् सववतवग रु ेण्य.ीं tat means that, savitur means the Creator, vareṇyaṁ means the Supreme. The first pāda means ‘That Supreme creator’. The second pāda or line of eight bīja-s is bhargo devasya dhīmahi भगो देवस्य ध मदह. bhargo means illuminating form, devasya means that belongs to the Brahman, dhīmahi means meditate. The second pada means we meditate on the illuminating form that belongs to the Brahman. The third pāda or line of eight bīja-s is dhīyo yo naḥ pracodayāt ध यो यो नः प्रचोदयात ्. dhiyo means the modifications of the mind, yo means that Brahman, naḥ means ours, pracodayāt means inducing. The third line means modification of our mind is induced by that Brahman. As a whole this is the meaning of Gāyatrī mantra without vyāhṛti-s and pranava. “We meditate on that illuminating form of the Supreme Creator, who induces modifications in our mind (mental modifications).” It is to be understood that such mental modifications do not happen if our consciousness is in the same frequency as that of the Brahman. Mental modifications happen only in the lower planes. Any mantra with gāyatrī meter will have twenty four bīja-s and this meter is supposed to protect our gross body. The gross body is nourished by the vital force or prāṇa and the first pāda of Gāyatrī mantra represents this vital force. The second pāda gives knowledge. Knowledge means, knowledge about the Brahman. This knowledge is gained through Veda-s and Upaniṣads. In ancient days, a disciple is sent to a Guru for learning Veda-s at a very young age. As the first step towards learning Veda-s, the disciple is initiated into Gāyatrī mantra. The third pāda of this mantra refers to turya stage, a stage beyond the three stages of sleep, dream and deep sleep. The process of Brahman realisation or Self-realisation happens if this fourth state of turya is reached and transcended. Only when one moves away from all types of consciousness, the Supreme Self-illuminating Brahman can be realized. When the mind gets totally detached from consciousness, the state of void is reached. Gāyatrī mantra is often said to represent the sun. In fact this is true to a large extent. Sun fits perfectly the description of the Brahman. Without sun, the world cannot function. The energy itself is derived from the sun. Sun is also self illuminating like the Brahman. The light of the sun alone illuminates other objects, or other objects are known only with the rays of the sun. Since all the qualities of the Brahman perfectly fit the sun, it is referred to as the creator. That is why the word savitur in the first pāda is said to mean the sun. But it should not be construed that Gāyatrī mantra is about sun. Sun is one of the creations of Śaktī and it is not the Brahman that we are discussing. The main qualities of the Brahman like illumination, creation etc happens only through the light of the sun and we realize that these acts happen because of sun’s energy. The internal Self illumination that is several times powerful than the sun and when realized within, is known as Self. Therefore, Gāyatrī mantra is about the Supreme Brahman. That is why the mantra itself uses the word ‘meditate’. Only through meditation, modifications of the mind can take place that can ultimately lead to un-conscious state of the mind where the self illuminating Brahman is realized. If Pañcadaśī mantra of Lalitāmbikā is recited once, it is equivalent to three recitations of Gāyatrī mantra. Each line of Pañcadaśī mantra is equivalent to one recitation of pūrṇa Gāyatrī mantra. The Gāyatrī mantra has got several curses from various gods and sages. The sage Viśvāmitra himself has cursed this mantra and there are certain mantra-s that are to be recited to remove all such curses. Unless these curses are removed, none can attain siddhi in this mahā mantra.}

421. व्याहृतिः
She is in the form of vyāhṛti-s of Gāyatrī mantra as discussed in the previous nāma.

422. सन्ध्या
Sandhyā means non-separation. It means non-separation of our mind with caitanya which is said to be in the sun. Caitanya is nothing but cit (pure consciousness) in its operational state that has been already discussed in nāma 416. Both the external experience caused by the senses and the internal experience caused by the mind happen only in cit or consciousness. It is here that both subjective and objective worlds develop as experience. So consciousness can also be called as the place of all experiences. Vedānta calls this as the Brahman and science terms this as consciousness. Non-duality is referred to by different names and forms and the word sandhyā is one among them. Everything that exists in this universe is only the manifestation of this cit or the Brahman. When sun itself gets its light only from the Self-illuminating Brahman, why caitanya is said to be in the sun? The answer is obvious. Everyone knows that earth cannot survive without sun. Secondly, sun is visible to our eyes. Since it is difficult for most of us to manifest the Brahman without form, for easy visualization, Brahman’s domicile is referred to as the sun and its rays are referred to the various creations of the Brahman. The time of dawn and dusk is also known as sandhya. Meditating during these times is said to provide the necessary impetus to the process of non-separation. Śiva Sūtra III.25 declares the result of such non-separation. It says,”Śivatulyo jāyate लशवतगल्यो जायते”. This Sūtra talks about final stages of liberation of a yogi. A yogi, who has not merged with Śiva but appears like Śiva. The difference between merging with Śiva and appearing like Śiva is significant. Merger with Śiva happens only in the stage of kaivalya, the ultimate stage. Therefore, this non-separation means that our mind should stand united with the Brahman, destroying the evil effects of māyā or illusion. Destruction of duality is advocated in this nāma. Sandhya is also known as the kinetic power of Śiva or the vimarśa form of the Brahman. The prakāśa form of the Brahman is Śiva. There is a story which says that Sandhya is the daughter of Brahma, the Lord of creation. She was born to Brahma during his meditation. She performed supreme penance and left her mortal body to be reborn as Arundhatī, {the little and scarcely visible star Alcor (belonging to the Great Bear, and personified as the wife of one of its seven chief stars, Vasiṣṭha, or of all the seven, the socalled seven riṣi-s}, wife of sage Vasiṣṭha. The three important nādi-s in kuṇḍalinī meditation iḍā, piṅgalā and suṣumna meet at ājñā cakra. This place is called sandhya as sandhya also means joining.

423. द्विजवृन्दनिषेविता
She is worshipped by those who recite Gāyatrī mantra. Those who recite Gāyatrī mantra are called dvijā-s or twice born. Twice born because, first birth through the mother and second birth is the initiation of Gāyatrī mantra. It is generally said that without initiation, Gāyatrī mantra should not be recited. Generally, father initiates Gāyatrī mantra to his sons. Nāma-s 421, 422 and 423 said to mean the three stages of consciousness viz. sleep, dream and deep sleep. Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (IV.iii.18) compares the first two stages of sleep and dream to that of a fish. It says “As a fish swims alternatively to both the banks of a river, so does this infinite being moves to both these states. In the first stage, awareness (with reference to mind) is total. In the second stage, awareness is partial. We are not aware of the happenings in the stage of deep sleep.” This stage is described in Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (IV.iii.19). “As a hawk flying in the sky becomes tired, and stretching its wings, is bound for its nest, so does this infinite being run for this state, where falling asleep, he craves no desire and sees no dream”. But Chāndogya Upaniṣad (VI.viii.1) explains all these three stages. “When we are awake, both body and mind are functioning. When we are dreaming, body is not functioning and the mind is still functioning (partially). In the deep sleep stage, the mind also ceases to function. When a person is said to be sleeping, he becomes one with the Self and he attains his real Self.” In the stage of deep sleep, we become unconscious. This is the stage where the individual consciousness stands merged with cosmic energy and in the process derives the necessary energy for sustenance of the body. This is the stage where one realizes the Brahman. For the world, he is said to be in the stage of unconsciousness, but he knows that his consciousness stands united with the Brahman. This process is called transcending consciousness, the stage of turya and beyond.

424. तत्त्वासना
Tattva-s mean the principles, either twenty four or thirty six. She is seated on these tattva-s or these tattva-s form Her throne. Tattva-s function both internally and externally. Mind, intellect, consciousness and ego together called antaḥkaraṇa or internal tools, work internally. Senses work externally. Senses are the extensions of the five basic elements. Five basic elements are ākāś, air, fire, water and earth. Five karmendriya-s are mouth, legs, hands, organ of excretion and organ of procreation. Five jñānendriya-s are ears, eyes, nose, mouth and skin. Five tanmātra-s are sound, taste, smell, light, and touch. All these make twenty and with antaḥkaraṇa, they become twenty four. The principles or tattva-s become thirty six if we add five tattva-s of Śiva and seven tattva-s of Śaktī (1. prākaśa 2. vimarśa 3. sādākhya, 4. aiśvarya, 5. Śuddha vidyā, 6. kāla, 7. vidyā, 8. rāga, 9. kāla, 10. niyati, 11. puruṣa and 12. prakṛti). It can also be said that She is beyond these tattva-s. A reference can be made to nāma-s 906 and 907.

425. तत्
The Brahman is referred to by three qualities. They are ‘om’ ‘tat’ ‘sat’ (Om tat sat). Tat means “That”. She is That and this That means the Brahman. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma nāma 731 is also Tat. Bhagavad Gīta (XVII.25) says “The seekers of liberation then perform various rites of sacrifice and austerities while concentrating on Tat without desiring results”. The highest level of God consciousness is called Tat. She is said to be in the form of the highest level of consciousness. The purest level of consciousness is Brahman.

426. त्वं
Tvam means you, indicating Her. Here tvam means the Brahman and is aptly described in Kena Upaniṣad (I.4) which says “That Brahman is different from all known and familiar objects. It is beyond even unknown objects.” Self realisation is nothing but union of this “That” and “I”. This reality will dawn one day like a sudden flash. There is a great saying “Tat tvam asi” (Tat means That (Brahman), tvam means you and asi means are) which means ‘you are That’. That means the Brahman. You are That Brahman, the famous mahā vākya.

427. अयी
Ayi is a way of addressing mother or sister. Since She is the supreme mother of the universe, She is addressed as ayi. When someone is addressed as ayi, it expresses more love than respect. This also means auspiciousness. It is pertinent to note that nāma-s 425, 426 and 427 together form ‘tattvamayi’ and this is nāma 907 of this Sahasranāma. This is the beauty of this Sahasranāma. As it progresses, the interpretation of nāma-s also transform from gross to subtle, indicating the spiritual progression.

428. पञ्चकोशान्तरस्थिता
She resides in the five sheaths. These sheaths form the covering of human organism, which is also called piṇḍa śarīra. The soul is covered by three overlapping vestures. They are causal body, subtle body and gross body. The casual body is the innermost and gross body is the outermost. The gross body is perishable, subtle body sustains for longer time and the casual body is permanent till the final liberation of the soul. The soul along with karmic account is embedded in the casual body. According to Vedānta philosophy, there are five superimposed sheaths known as kośa. The inner most is ānandamaya kośa (the sheath of bliss), which corresponds to the casual body. The next three layers are vijñānamaya kośa (the sheath of intellect and knowledge), manomaya kośa, the sheath of mind, prānamaya kośa, the sheath of vital airs like prāna, apāna, etc. These three, vijñānamaya kośa, manomaya kośa and prānamaya kośa correspond to the subtle body. The fifth and the outer sheath is annamaya kośa, the sheath of food that corresponds to the gross body. The entire sheathing structure of the human organism hides the soul or puruṣa or the self, deep within and falsely projecting itself as the microcosm and bringing forth the illusion of the world as the macrocosm. Apart from the above interpretation, there is another explanation. While performing navāvaraṇa pūja, after the ninth āvaraṇa there is a ritual called pañcapaṁcikā pūja. Here, five Devi-s are worshiped one above the other, at the bindu (the central point of Śrī Cakra). The details may not be necessary for the interpretation of this nāma, as the main interpretation should be based on the five sheaths of the body. These coverings could also mean five different stages of samādhi. To reach the final stage of nirvikalpa samādhi, one has to transcend the other stages of samādhi.

429. निःसीममहिमा
Her greatness has no boundaries, as the Brahman is omnipresent. Niḥsīman means immeasurable.

430. नित्ययौवना
She is eternally youthful, as She is beyond space and time.

431. मदशालिनी
She is in the stage of ānanda, the stage of bliss. Normally, bliss is a stage where one’s thoughts are totally unified with the Brahman, resulting in emotional happiness. But being the Brahman Herself, She is in the stage of bliss by associating Her thoughts with Her spouse and creator Śiva. Though She is in the stage of bliss, She continues to perform Her duties of creation, sustenance and dissolution. This is a typical example of karma yoga that Kṛṣṇa talks about in Bhagavad Gīta. The effects of this bliss on Her person is described in the next two nāma-s.

432. मदघूर्णितरक्ताक्षी
Her eyes have natural red tinge. This tinge is due to the reflection of redness associated with Her. This nāma says that Her eyes are red due to bliss. One’s eyes will turn red after a deep and intense meditation. This naturally happens due to the heat generated in the body during meditation. Drinking plenty of water and consuming fresh fruits always help in controlling this heat. By transforming this heat into energy, one can develop healing abilities.

433. मदपाटलगण्डभूः
Because of Her blissful state, Her cheeks blush with red colour. If a person regularly meditates, his body turns into golden sheen. This is because, during intense meditation, the consciousness detaches from external objects and focuses internally, providing sheen to the body, as the awareness moves towards the Self-illuminating light of the Brahman.

434. चन्दनद्रवदिग्धाङ्गी
Her body is smeared with sandal paste. Sandal paste is said to cool down the internal body heat.

435. चाम्पेयकुसुमप्रिया
She is fond of campaka flower (michelia Campaka). Her liking for this flower is already mentioned in nāma 13.

436. कुशला
She is skilful. Because She handles all the three acts of divinity with such an ease, She is addressed as skilful.

437. कोमलाकारा
She has beautiful and tender body. She has a graceful form.

438. कुरुकुल्ला
Kurukullā is a goddess who dwells in Śrī Cakra between the boundaries of ego and consciousness. The Bhāvanopaniṣad considers goddess Vārāhi as father and Kurukullā as mother. It says, “Vārāhi pitṛurūpā kurukullā balidevatā mātā (वारादह वपतरूृ पा कगरुकगल्ला बललदेवता माता).” This is based on the principle that our body consists of sensory organs along with flesh and blood that cause the feeling of bodily lust. The physical description of Kurukullā is terrifying, probably indicating that lust is one of the factors that form a stumbling block to the spiritual progression.

439. कुलेश्वरी
She is the ruler of the triad kula. The triad consists of cognisor, cognized and cognition (the psychological level of perception). She controls this triad that leads to Self-realisation. If all the three become one, She is realised.

440. कुलकुण्डालया
Kulakuṇda is a small orifice in mūlādhāra cakra, where She takes rest. Saundarya Laharī (verse 10) also says, “Reaching your own ground mūlādhāra and coverting yourself into a serpent with three coils and half, You sleep in the crevice in the centre of mūlādhāra lotus.” A practitioner’s spiritual pursuit begins from Kulakuṇda that transcends upwards to turya and turyātīta stages where bliss and salvation take place.

441. कौलमार्गतत्परसेविता
She is worshipped by those who follow the kaula tradition. This nāma means that She is worshipped through the methods followed by one’s lineage. The worship differs based on the rituals followed. In Her worship there are three main paths called samaya, kaula and miśra. Samaya path follows the teachings of Veda-s. Kaula way of worship is purely based on tantric rituals. This is considered as the lower level of worship as it advocates the five M-s or makāra-s [makāra-s because they begin with letter M in Sanskrit and they are mudra (finger gestures), fish (matsya), meat (māṃsa), mada, (a type of intoxicating drink) and conjugation (mithuna). Sometimes, mudra or finger gestures replace mada], never accepted by Vedic scholars. However, this worship has its own tough rituals. The third is miśra or the mixed way of worship, consisting of both Vedic and tantric rituals.

442. कुमारगणनाथाम्बा
Mother of Kārttikeya or Skanda and Gaṇeśa. There is a deeper meaning to this nāma. The nāma is split into ku (inferior) + māragaṇa (modification of intense passion or emotion) + nāthā (lords of the above) + ambā (the one who binds). This gets translated as ‘the lord of the inferior and intense passion or emotion, who causes binding to the materialistic world, known as ego. Kumara is said to be the lord of ego. Viṣṇu or Śiva is known as Puruṣa. Lakṣmī or Pārvatī, their consorts are known as avyakta (the un-manifested form of prakṛti). Ego arises during the union of puruṣa and avyakta. Puruṣa is the king, avyakta is the queen and ego is the chief of army. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (X.24), “among generals, I am Skanda.” It is also said that by worshipping Skanda, one can destroy one’s ego. Kānchi Śaṃkarācārya said, “Whatever God one may choose for worship only if Gaṇeśa’s benedicition is obtained first, prayers will fructify without hindrance.”

443. तुष्टिः
Beginning with this nāma, next seven nāma-s describe Her seven specific qualities. She is in the form of happiness. This happiness is due to contentment. She is only a giver. She derives happiness in giving.

444. पुष्टिः
She is in the form fullness, fullness of the body and mind.

445. मतिः
She is in the form of intellect. Intelligence is gained by experience when puruṣa or the soul manifests. She is in the form such intelligence. It is also said that Śiva is called mati because of His knowledge about Veda-s.

446. धृतिः
She is in the form of courageousness and steadfastness, the qualities that are required to administer the universe.

447. शान्तिः
She is known for Her quietude. Śānti means the eternal peace of mind derived from controlling senses. Fifteen inches from the tip of the nose is where the soul gets purified (this could also mean the exhalation of carbon dioxide and inhalation of air containing more oxygen). This is called sixteenth kalā and this kalā is known as Śānti. She is in the form of Śānti, purifying the souls, subject to their karma-s.

448. स्वस्तिमती
The Absolute Reality. The absolute reality is beyond empirical reality and manifestations. Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (II.i.20) refers this situation as “Truth of truth (the absolute reality), has a transcendental import and it is difficult to understand”.

449. कान्तिः
This nāma refers to the Self-illuminating nature of the Brahman. This is the will of the Brahman to sustain. Because of this illumination, sun shines and sustains the universe. With this, the seven nāma-s describing of Her seven qualities end.

450. नन्दिनी
A type of holy cow that is capable giving whatever is asked for. This also means the river Gaṅgā. She is in the form of river Gaṅgā who is known for her purifying qualities.

451. विघ्ननाशिनी
The one who destroys all obstacles. She destroys the obstacles while acquiring knowledge of the Brahman.

452. तेजोवती
She is radiating. This nāma is more or less in line with nāma 449 kāntiḥ discussed earlier. But there is subtle difference between these two. The earlier nāma is the will of the Brahman and this nāma talks about the creative aspect of the Brahman. Both for creation and sustenance, light is required. This nāma more explicitly explains Her luminous nature, from which other luminaries derive light. This nāma further confirms the fact that Brahman alone is Self-illuminating. Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (III.viii.9) says, “the sun and moon are in their positions under the mighty rule of this Immutable.”

453. त्रिनयना
Three eyed. Her three eyes are sun, moon and fire. In the subtler sense, this can also mean Her kāmakalā form (nāma 322). Śiva has three eyes representing speech, inference and observation. Since She is not different from Śiva, She too has three eyes. This has been more fully described by sage Patañjali in his master piece yoga sūtra-s (I.7). To know that something is right, one has to depend upon three factors viz. pratyakṣa or direct perception, anumāna or inference and āgamāḥ or spiritual knowledge (spiritual knowledge is also known as wisdom). Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (II.iv.5) expounds it further by saying “by the realisation of the Self through hearing, reflection and meditation all this is known.” These three are said to be the three eyes of spiritually awakened persons. Trinayanā could also mean ājñā cakra or the third eye that is capable of developing one’s clairvoyance. There are three types of Her worship and they are left hand worship, right hand worship and Vedic worship. She leads these worshippers in the proper way in any of the paths chosen by them. Though the paths are different, the ultimate destination is the Brahman. Typically, these paths mean the mental attitude of the pursuer.

454. लोलाक्षी
She is in the form of desire of women. Lolākṣī means a woman. This desire is explained by Kṛṣṇa in Bhagavad Gīta (VII.11)”I am that desire in men which is in keeping with dharma (righteousness)”. The desire that Kṛṣṇa refers to is the liberation. Probably Her desire is for Śiva (nāma 320), as otherwise She has everything and there is no need for any desires for Her. It is also interpreted that Her desire is not for Śiva alone, but for everyone. As an indicative nature for the all the living beings, the word women is used. This could be based on the principle that without desires of women, procreation is not possible, highlighting the holiness of motherhood. She is also said to be in the form of a deity called Yogeśvarī, the goddess of desire. There are eight mothers (aṣṭa māta-s), representing eight different human qualities. They are 1. Yogeśvarī representing desire, 2. Māheśvarī for anger, 3. Vaiṣṇavī for greed, 4. Brāhmaṇī for passion, 5. Kalyāṇī for bewilderment, 6. Indrajā for envy, 7. Vārāhī for disdain and 8. Yamadaṇḍā for death. There are variations in their names from the one mentioned above, while worshipping them in Śrī Cakra. They are worshipped in Śrī Cakra as Brāhmī, Māheśvarī, Kaumārī, Vaiṣṇavī, Vārāhī, Māhendrī, Cāmunḍā and Mahālakṣmī. These goddesses are worshiped in the first āvaraṇa in Śrī Cakra worship. Aṣṭa māta-s also refer to eight veins on both sides of human neck.

455. मालिनी
She is wearing garland. This garland is made up fiftyone alphabets of Sanskrit. Since She is Śabda Brahman, all the alphabets originate from Her and it is logical to say that She wears these alphabets in the form of a garland (refer nāma-s 366 – 371). Mālinī is the goddess of fifty one alphabets of Sanskrit. Mātṛkā Mālinī connotes the fifty one alphabets of the Sanskrit in the regular order. Mātṛkā means unknown mother or the divine mother. Mālinī means the one who holds the universe within Herself. As opposed to Mātṛkā Mālinī, Mālinī refers to fifty one letters of Sanskrit alphabet in an irregular order. Following is an example - न ऋ ॠ ....द फ There is a story in Varāha Purāṇa. Mālinī is a close friend of Lalitai. At the time of Lalitai’s marriage with Śiva, Mālinī held the foot of Śiva firmly and refused to release it. Śiva asked Mālinī to release His foot for which He was willing to grant any boons. Mālinī asked Śiva to shower on her friend Lalitai, all His prosperities in exchange for releasing His foot. Śiva told Mālinī that He had already conferred His fortunes on Her and that She can now release His foot. There is a tantra by name Mālinī tantra. Mālinī also means the successive destructive way of I consciousness. Mālinī also refers to a girl of seven year old.

456. हंसिनी
In the form of haṁsa mantra, also known as ajapa mantra, a method of mantra recitation from dawn to dawn concentrating on the psychic cakra-s. Ajapa japa also relies on inhalation and exhalation. Swans are known for their agility of walking. Poetic parlance of Saundarya Laharī (verse 91) describes this situation as ‘the swans that are nurtured in the house of Paramaśiva (Her house as well) practice your walking agility’.

457. माता
The first nāma of this Sahasranāma is Śrī Mātā meaning universal mother. Lalitā Sahasranāma is the only Sahasranāma where a nāma is not repeated twice. In this nāma, Śrī that was a prefix in the first nāma is not used. Another example like this are nāma-s 53 Śiva and 998 Śrī Śiva. In view of the contextual reference of this nāma i.e. while dealing with mantra-s (nāma-s 453, 455, 456), this nāma can be interpreted as ‘She is the mother of mantra-s’. She is also known as Mātṛkā meaning the mother of letters.

458. मलयाचलवासिनी
In Kerala, a state of India, She is worshipped as Bhagavatī. The state of Kerala is known as Malayācala. Malayalam is the language spoken in Kerala. Malayācala mountain has rich growth of sandalwood trees and therefore, has natural fragrance. This place is also known as the garden of Indra, the chief of demigods and goddesses. The subtle meaning conveyed by this nāma is that She has natural fragrance emanating because of mantra-s. By drawing a comparison to natural fragrance, the power of mantra-s is portrayed.

459. सुमुखी
She has a beautiful face. Face is the reflective part of wisdom. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (IV.14.2) says “your face is shining like that of a knower of Brahman. Who has taught you?” (The Upaniṣad proceeds to say that a person who has known the Brahman remains pure and nothing could taint him. He is incompetent of doing anything wrong). If one advances spiritually, his face becomes radiant and glows. Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (VI.15) also says “I, a seeker of liberation, take refuge in that luminous Lord, who reveals Self-knowledge in the mind”. Self can be identified only with luminosity. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma nāma 456 Sumukhā which gives the same meaning. Mantra initiation should be taken only from these types of gurus, not from the one who is associated only with rituals. Only then, the purpose of initiation is attained.

460. नलिनी
Her limbs are compared to a lotus flower. Nāma 278 said that She is seated on a lotus seat. This nāma says that She Herself looks like a lotus flower. The beauty of Her sculptured figure is described by making a subtle comparison to a lotus flower. River Gaṅgā is also known as Nalinī. It is said that there is a river by name Gaṅgā in the heaven, which is also known as Nalinī.

461. सुभ्रूः
She has beautiful eyebrows. Nāma 17 already described about Her eyebrows by drawing a comparison to festoons. Saundarya Laharī (verse 47) beautifully describes Her eyes. “Oh! Umā! Ever bent on dispelling the fears of the world! I take your two slightly knit eyebrows to be the bow of the consort of Rati.” The verse says that Her eyebrows are arched like a bow and the two eyes appearing like bees down below and Śrī Śaṃkara superimposes a bowstring connecting the two eyes. The bow thus formed is ready to destroy fear of Her devotees. Like anger, fear is also one of the worst enemies of mankind.

462. शोभना
Her exceptional beauty is portrayed. Vāc Devi-s have failed in their attempts to describe Her beauty by drawing comparisons to the objects of mankind. Since they could not amply describe Her beauty, they ended up with this nāma while delineating Her beauty. Śobhanā means the beauty embodied and endowed with auspiciousness. This is called the divine beauty. The word śobha also means divine, anything propitious, auspicious, welfare, prosperity, moral good and virtue.

463. सुरनायिका
She is the head of Deva-s. Deva-s mean all types of gods and goddesses that include Brahma, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Sarasvatī, Lakṣmī, etc. The difference between Gods and demigods is that the former directly partake in the three important activity of the Brahman, creation, sustenance and dissolution, whereas the latter do not. Typically the difference is between the highest authority and a mediocre authority.

464. कालकण्ठी
Śiva is also known as Kālakaṇṭha because of blue colour of the poison in his throat. Kaṇṭha means throat. This poison is called kālakūṭa or kālahāla the deadliest poison got out of churning ocean, which was swallowed by Śiva. She being the wife of Śiva is known as Kālakaṇṭhī. It is also said that when Śiva was consuming the poison, She held His throat, preventing Him to swallow the poison. Kālakaṇṭhī, a deity, is said to be the creation of Śiva along with Kālī for destroying demons. Kala also means soft sound and kaṇṭhī means throat. This could mean Her sweet and soft voice (refer nāma 27).

465. कान्तिमती
She is resplendent and radiating. Refer nāma 449 Kāntī. Matī means many things, such as intelligence, etc. This nāma says that Her intelligence is radiating.

466. क्षोभिणी
She causes creative pulsation or throbbing in Śiva for creation. Kṣobha means shaking or agitation. As a result of this throbbing Śiva makes the souls or puruṣa-s to merge with prakṛti to commence the process of creation. The soul or puruṣa can manifest only if it interacts with prakṛti, which is also known as the Nature. This process is known as the creative Self-unfolding act. It is only the prakṛti that unfolds the act of creation. When the soul is associated with prakṛti, the latter unfolds first into the subtle nonmaterialistic form and later into the gross form. Once the gross forms emerge, the karma-s of souls begin to manifest, thereby initiating the activities of creation. This process is known as spanda, the dynamic aspect of Śiva.

467. सूक्ष्मरूपिणी
This nāma refers to Her subtle form. As already discussed, She is known through three forms. The first one is Her gross (sthūla rūpa) form that is described in the dhyāna verses of this Sahasranāma. Her subtle form is kāmakalā (nāma 322) the sūkṣma rūpa, the present nāma. Her subtlest form is Her kuṇḍalinī, the parā-rūpa ( nāma 366) (kuṇḍalinī - nāma 110). All these three forms are amply discussed throughout this Sahasranāma. Kaṭha (कठ) Upaniṣad explains this subtle form (I.ii.20). It says aṇoḥ aṇīyān meaning smaller than the smallest. The Self is smaller than the smallest and bigger than the biggest and from this arises all existence and the one who knows this process is called self-realised person. Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (I.i.6) says susūkṣmaṁ which again means smaller than the smallest. It is eternal, the cause for creation and He is realised by those who long for Him. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma 457 is sūkṣma conveying the same meaning. Arjuna addresses Kṛṣṇa in Bhagavad Gita (XI.18), “Your form is difficult to see because of its glaring effulgence, spreading on all sides, like blazing fire on the immeasurable radiance of the sun. Yet I see this glowing form everywhere”. Sūkṣma is also known as a type of internal fire oblations, in the ever existing fire of kuṇḍalinī, in mūlādhāra cakra. As this is performed mentally, it is called sūkṣma homa (homa is the act of making an oblation to the Devas or gods by casting clarified butter into the fire)

468. वज्रेश्वरी
She is the sixth nitya devi worshipped in Śrī Cakra in jālandhara pīṭha, situated in viśuddhi cakra, also known as throat cakra. Again, in the Śrī Cakra worship, in the eighth āvaraṇa, there is a deity by name Mahā-Vajreśvarī who is worshipped in the innermost triangle of Śrī Cakra. This devi represents vidyā tattva, sustenance of the universe, dream state, jñāna śakti, Her kāmakalā form, etc. Śrī Cakra worship is to be looked into from an entirely different angle. There are so many deities representing various acts of the Brahman. Each such activity is realised by way of worshipping in the form of deities. Without understanding such acts of the Brahman, mere ritualistic worship does not lead to realization. After worshipping the attributes of the Brahman, in the centre of Śrī Cakra, at the bindu point Śiva and Śaktī are worshipped, the focal point of Creation in the form of prakāśa and vimarśa. There is an invisible river called Vajra where pleasant musical notes of swans are flowing. On the banks of this river, there is a deity called Vajreśī adorned with diamond ornaments. She is worshipped by lord Indra, the chief of demigods and goddesses. It is also said that Indra obtained his famous and the deadliest of his armouries called vajrāyudha after performing penance on Her. She was pleased with Indra’s penance and gave him this armour and then only Indra could return to his world.

469. वामदेवी
Wife of Vāmadeva, yet another form of Śiva. In Hindu mythology, Śiva has five faces namely Īśāna, Tatpuruṣa, Aghora, Vāmadeva and Sadyojāta. Each of these faces represents five elements like ākāś, etc. Ancient scriptures say that only three faces of Śiva are visible. The fourth one is on his back and the fifth face called Vāmadeva is on the top of His head. This head represents the element of ether or ākāś. Liṅga Purāṇa describes Śiva’s Vāmadeva form like this: ‘He was adorned in red ornaments. He wore red garlands and clothes. His eyes were red. He was valorous.’ Vāmadeva mantra of Śiva is “ॐ namo brahmane Vāmadevāya. ॐ नमो ब्रह्मने वामदेवाय”. It is said that if one regularly chants this mantra, he is absolved of his sins and is not born again. The combined form of Śiva and Śaktī is known as Ardhanārīśvara form. This form is also known as Vāmadeva form, because She occupies His left portion. It can also be said that Śiva’s Vāmadeva form is red because, She is occupying His left side and Her red complexion gets reflected in His crystal white colour. Left is also known as vāma and hence Vāmadevī. She is also worshipped through vāmācāra, the rituals performed with left hand. Even today, this type of worship is being followed widely, though it is against the teachings of Veda-s.

470. वयोऽवस्थाविवर्जिता
She is beyond the effects of aging. This is the quality of the Brahman, who does not undergo changes.

471. सिद्धेश्वरि
She is the Īśvarī of Siddha-s. Siddha-s worship Her. Siddha-s are those who have attained the powers of aṣṭama siddhi or eight types of super human powers. Such powers are attained only through kuṇḍalinī meditation. As per the concept of Siddha-s, Śiva stays in the crown cakra or sahasrāra without any movement. It is only Śaktī, in the form of kuṇḍalinī moving towards Śiva. She is worshipped in the form of kuṇḍalinī by such yogis. Hence, She is called Siddheśvarī.

472. सिद्धविद्या
The eternal mantra of Pañcadaśī is called siddhi-vidyā. All mantras have the potency of facilitating auspiciousness to a person who recites mantra-s with dedication and devotion. Mantra of god (he) is known as mantra itself and mantra of goddesses (she) is known as vidyā. When someone is to get an initiation of mantra, his guru will test the suitability of a mantra to that person. If a mantra does not suit a person, it causes more harm than good. That is why, knowledgeable gurus initiates their disciples with an ātma bīja (the letter of the soul), and prefixing this ātma bīja to any mantra will only rains in auspiciousness. For quicker results, the ātma bīja can also be prefixed and suffixed to a mantra or a mantra can be encased between ātma bīja-s, by prefixing and suffixing. However, such intricate subjects are to be decided by one’s guru. But, Pañcadaśī mantra is exempted from testing its suitability. This mantra will not cause any harm under any circumstances. Pañcadaśī mantra has been described in detail in the introduction. Normally mantra-s are initiated during an auspicious time. For Pañcadaśī mantra, such astrological calculations are not necessary. This is based on the principle that all the planets function under Her control.

473. सिद्धमाता
She is worshipped as their mother by Siddha-s or yogi-s. Even for a sannyasin, mother remains as an exception. The supremacy of motherhood is well known. Siddha-s renounce everything and always stay connected with Śiva and Śaktī. There are certain yogi-s who get into deep meditation, without even taking food for years. They are able to survive because of the power of kuṇḍalinī, through which they stand connected to the cosmos. Such yogi-s address Her as Ma and hence She is known as mother of such yogi-s. Already, Her supreme motherhood has been discussed in nāma-s 1 (Śrī Māta) and 457 (Māta). She protects such yogi-s as their mother.

474. यशस्विनी
The most renowned. She is famous because of Her multitude of capabilities. Śiva, after creating Her, does not get involved with any of the activities of the universe. She administers the entire universe independently. Mahānārāyaṇa Upaniṣad (I.10) beautifully explains this situation. It says “No person ever grasped by his understanding the upward limit of this Paramātma, nor his limit across, nor his middle portion. His name is ‘great glory’.” Such is the type of Her greatness. INTRODUCTION TO YOGINI-S From nāma 475 to 534 (60 nāma-s) discuss in detail about the six cakra-s or psychic centres of kuṇḍalinī and sahasrārā. Each cakra or psychic centre is presided over by a deity called yogini and there are seven such yogini-s. The seven cakra-s in the body (considering sahasrāra as a cakra for easier understanding) represent particular body element such as skin, blood, muscle, fat, bone, marrow and semen or egg. Each yogini is described in 10 or 9 or 7 nāma-s. It is to be clearly understood that these nāma-s are not direct reference to Lalitāmbikā. Since Lalitāmbikā is described to be in the form of kuṇḍalinī energy, and the kuṇḍalinī energy has to transcend these cakra-s to reach sahasrāra from mūlādhāra, worshipping the presiding deities of these cakra-s have been undertaken Vāc Devi-s. However, the order of worship neither commences from the base cakra to the crown cakra nor from the crown cakra to the base cakra. It begins with viśuddhi cakra, goes down to the lower cakras then to ājñā and ends with sahasrāra. Each of these yogini-s has their own dhyāna verses, japa mantra-s, etc. They have their own assistants and the most important among them is also referred against each of the yogini-s. Their complexion, their armouries, qualities, the food they like, etc have also been described. Sanskrit acoustics has fifty alphabets. All these fifty alphabets are placed in the six cakra-s. A detailed discussion is provided on the number of Sanskrit alphabets in nāma 833. The order in which they are mentioned in this Sahasranāma is based on two concepts. Each of these yogini-s has many faces. The yogini at viśuddhi cakra has one face and the yogini at sahasrāra has many faces. Probably Vāc Devi-s could have prioritized these yogini-s based on the number their faces. Alternatively, Vāc Devi-s could have chosen this order based on the type of bodily element, each of these yogini-s represent. First, we have skin followed by blood, muscle and other elements one below the other. The food that we consume is literally cooked by the internal fire in our stomach called jadarāgni. This ‘cooked food’ undergoes suitable changes, modifications and conversions and infused to the respective bodily elements and the finest essence of all is converted into semen and eggs (they are sometimes wrongly interpreted as ojas) that are capable of reproduction. Bhavanopaniṣad (verse 4) says that father of these elements is goddess Vārāhī (nāma 70) and mother is goddess Kurukullā (nāma 438). Sanskrit has fifty alphabets that are divided into sixteen vowels known as ‘letters of life’ (verbatim translation) and the balance is called ‘letters of body’. Each cakra has certain number of lotus petals and each of these petals represent a particular alphabet of Sanskrit. For example, the throat cakra or viśuddhi cakra has sixteen lotus petals, which represent sixteen vowels. The explanation provided here is nothing to do with kuṇḍalinī meditation. What we are going to discuss is concerned about the presiding deity of each cakra and related narrations. It has already been discussed that Her subtlest form is kuṇḍalinī. With this brief introduction, we now proceed to discuss about yogini-s presiding over the seven cakra-s (including sahasrāra) in the next sixty nāmas. Before we proceed with the next 60 nāma-s, it is to be understood that these nāma-s do not refer Lalitāmbikā, but Her important attendants known as yogini-s. They refer only to the presiding yogini-s of mystic cakra-s, through which Śaktī passes through, to reach Śiva at the crown cakra. There are six cakra-s that are subtle in nature in the spinal cord, beginning with the base cakra or mūlādhāra and ending with ājñā cakra or third eye. The crown or the sahasrāra is not called as cakra. Vāc Devi-s now commence their description of these cakra-s in detail.

475. विशुद्धिचक्रनिलया
Viśuddhi cakra is also known as throat cakra. Viśuddhi cakra is smoky purple in colour. It appears as a sixteen petal lotus with sixteen vowels of Sanskrit with bindu-s (dots) inscribed on each of the petals. Each of these cakra-s has one predominant bīja and bīja for Viśuddhi cakra is haṁ (हीं). This bīja is white in colour, representing ākāś tattva and seated on a white elephant. Vāc Devi-s begin with viśuddhi cakra, through which speech is delivered in the form of vaikharī (nāma 371). The descriptions of these cakra-s begin with the name of the cakra and ends with the name of the yogini who is the presiding deity of that cakra. For example, this nāma says viśuddhi-cakra-nilayā which means ‘she resides in viśuddhi cakra’. But who resides in this cakra is mentioned only in nāma 484, which says ḍākinīsvarī, the name of the yogini who controls this cakra. Unless all the nāma-s (normally 7 to 10 nāma-s for a cakra) pertaining to a particular cakra are studied, understanding of a particular cakra will remain incomplete.

476. आरक्तवर्णा
The yogini’s (ḍākinī) complexion is mild red.

477. त्रिलोचना
Dākinī has three eyes.

478. खट्वाङ्गादिप्रहरणा
Khaṭvāṅgā is a club fitted with human skull. Dākinī holds this club. It is her weapon.

479. वदनैकसमन्विता
She has a single face. The order of priority of the cakra-s is based upon the number of faces each yogini has. Dākinī is single faced and she represents ākāś tattva.

480. पायसान्नप्रिया
Pāyasanna is a kind of semi solid sweet normally offered to gods and goddesses on festive occasions. This is made out of rice or cereal cooked with sugar and milk. This nāma says that yogini of viśuddhi cakra, Dākinī is fond of this preparation.

481. त्वक्स्था
Dākinī presides over skin and sensation of touch. Skin being the outermost covering of a living being is another reason for Vāc Devis to commence the narration of the cakra-s commencing from viśuddhi cakra.

482. पशुलोकभयङ्करी
Paśu means those who are ignorant. Here ignorance means lack of knowledge about the Brahman or those who are afflicted with duality. Dākinīśvarī is frightful to those who are ignorant. This type of ignorance is explained in Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (I.iv.10) thus.”Even the gods cannot prevail against him, for he becomes their self. While he who worships another god thinking, ‘He is one, and I am another’ does not know. He is like an animal to the gods.” The same Upaniṣad further explains about the fear arising out of ignorance. “He was afraid. Therefore, people are afraid to be alone. He thought ‘If there is nothing else but me, what am I afraid of?’ From that alone his fear was gone, for what was there to fear? It is from a second entity that fear comes” (I.iv.2). Taittirīya Upaniṣad also explains this fear (II.7). “When a person rests fearlessly in that Self, he is no longer afraid of anything. So long as he sees the least difference between himself and the Cosmic Self, he is not altogether free from fear. A person may be learned, but if he still thinks he is separate from Brahman, Brahman itself becomes a source of terror.” The presiding deity of viśuddhi cakra Dākinīśvarī causes this fear arising out of ignorance. If proper steps are initiated to realise the Brahman within, fear can be overpowered which otherwise will remain as a huge hindrance while pursuing the path of spirituality. Nāma 354 is paśu pāśa vimocanī referred to Lalitāmbikā and this nāma refers to Dākinīśvarī. There is difference between these two nāma-s. In 354 Lalitāmbikā’s ability to remove the ignorance is mentioned, whereas in this nāma Dākinīśvarī is simply mentioned as the goddess who induces a sense of fear amongst the ignorant. This difference indicates the quality of the Supreme Brahman and a yogini.

483. अमृतादिमहाशक्तिसंवृता
Dākinīśvarī is surrounded by sixteen śakti-s. Each of these sixteen śakti-s presides over each of the sixteen petals. Each vowel is represented by a śakti. Names of these śakti-s begin with all the sixteen vowels. For example, alphabet अ is presided over by śakti Amṛtā, the next vowel आ is presided over by Ākarśanī, etc. Śakti-s in this context refer to the lower level of goddesses controlled by Dākinīśvarī. This nāma specifically says that these śakti-s are powerful by using the word mahā which means great.

484. डाकिनीश्वरी
The name of yogini who has been described from nāma 475 to 484 is Dākinīśvarī, the presiding deity of viśuddhi cakra

485. अनाहताब्जनिलया
Anāhata cakra is known as heart cakra, which is below the throat carka or viśuddhi cakra in the heart area (nāma 475) in the spinal cord. There is an imaginary lotus with twelve petals that is dull red in colour. This is the cakra where sound is produced without any friction. This sound is called Śabda Brahman. Veda-s says that the soul which is also known as puruṣa resides here. “The thumb sized puruṣa is seen as a smokeless flame in their hearts” says Kaṭha Upaniṣad (II.1.13). Below this anāhata cakra, there is a small eight petal lotus where one’s Iṣṭa Devata is meditated. The difference between soul and Iṣṭa Devata is clearly distinguished here and should not be confused with the Brahman. The first twelve consonants with bindu-s are conceived in each of the petals. The pericarp of the lotus is a hexagonal structure. This cakra represents air element and yaṁ (यीं) is the bīja for this cakra. Yaṁ bīja is the bīja meant for protection and is capable of fulfilling desires. Ātma bīja for an individual is elicited by taking into account various such factors. Yogini who presides over this cakra is Rākiṇī (nāma 494). It is to be noted that the names of the yogini-s who preside over all these cakra-s differ from the texts that deal exclusively with kuṇḍalinī. For example, in this Sahasranāma the yogini of this cakra is referred as Rākiṇī, whereas in other texts her name is mentioned as Kākiṇī. Kākiṇī is the presiding yogini of svādhiṣṭhāna cakra in this Sahasranāma. This nāma says that Rākiṇī, who is depicted in the next nine nāma-s resides in the heart cakra is ever alert to pave way for Lalitāmbikā to reach the sahasrāra. Every time when She passes through this cakra, the soul which is embedded here gets blessed by Her. When this happens, the intensity of the karmic manifestation gets reduced, thereby making a person devout.

486. श्यामाभा
The description of Rākiṇī now begins. She has greenish dark complexion and of sixteen years of age.

487. वदनद्वया
Rākiṇī has two faces. Yogini Dākinīśvarī of viśuddhi cakra has one face (nāma 479) and as per the ascending order of faces on which the cakra-s are denoted in this Sahasranāma, Rākiṇī has two faces.

488. दंष्ट्रोज्ज्वला
Rākiṇī has terrifying teeth (also referred as tusk) like that of a wild boar.

489. अक्षमालादिधरा
Rākiṇī is wearing a garland made of fifty one beads, representing all the fifty one alphabets of Sanskrit. Since sound is heard in this cakra without arising from any cause of friction (normally sound can be produced with the aid of any two objects, for example clapping, wherein we need to use both the palms). Since this cakra is capable of producing sound on its own (during deep meditation, the sound of ॐ is heard from this cakra) and sound is carried by air, the Vāc Devi-s have fittingly chosen Rākiṇī for wearing this garland of letters. There is an Upaniṣad called Akṣamālika Upaniṣad that discusses about fifty one alphabets of Sanskrit. It says that one should make a garland (mālā) of fifty one beads made up of different gems and metals strung with gold or silver string. This should be consecrated by the procedures laid down therein. Any japa done with this mālā would make any mantra fructify early. In general, all japa mālā-s should be consecrated before using it for counting. Such mālā-s should be treated as sacred as mantra-s.

490. रुधिरसंस्थिता
Rākiṇī presides over blood, the element next to the skin. This is another reason for Vāc Devi-s to formulate anāhata cakra next to viśuddhi.

491. कालरात्र्यादिशक्त्यौघवृता
Rākiṇī is surrounded by twelve of her assistants like Kālarātrī devi, each presiding over a petal. It is said that Kālarātrī devi was born out of tamo guṇa of Rudra who is described like this. “She is three eyed, whose lustre is like that of rising sun, whose plaits are loose and dishevelled, who is in black garments, who holds in her four hands Liṅga, Bhuvana, truncheon and boon, who is brilliant with the lustre of different kinds of ornaments, who is cheerful and is served by the group of deva-s and whose body is torn and bruised by the arrows of the mind-born lord of love.” Recitation of her mantra causes destruction of one’s enemies. She is also said to be a form of Durgā. It is also said that on the eve of one’s death, this devi appears in dream bespeaking the death. Kālarātrī also refers to a particular night in the life of a man on the seventh day of the seventh month of the seventy-seventh year, after which period a man is exempt from attending to ordinances prescribed by dharma śāstra-s.

492. स्निग्धौदनप्रिया
Rākiṇī is fond of rice mixed with ghee. This food item is capable of producing quality blood.

493. महावीरेन्द्रवरदा
She (Rākiṇī) grants boons to warriors. Here warriors mean eloquent orators and such eloquence is the boon given by Rākiṇī. This epithet augurs well with mālā made of fifty one alphabets, the element of air and the manifestation of anāhata sound. Śiva Sūtra (I.11) says “Being an enjoyer of the rapture of ‘I’ consciousness in waking, dreaming and deep sleep stages becomes the warrior of his senses.” Vīra mean the senses and one who wins over these Vīra -s is called vīrendra. In this context, vīrendra means all those who are able to reach the fourth state of turya where bliss is enjoyed. The next higher stage of turya is known as turyātīta where Self-realisation takes place. These are the stages of one’s own consciousness. It is also said that one who has transcended the concepts of “I” and “this” is called Vīra and she derives pleasure in granting them boons (she holds boon in her hand – nāma 491).

494. राकिण्यम्बास्वरूपिणी
She assumes the form of Rākiṇī, who has been described from nāma 485 to 494 (ten nāma-s).

495. मणिपूराब्जनिलया
Maṇipūraka cakra is the navel cakra and the yogini who presides over this cakra is Lākinī. From this nāma till nāma 503 (nine nāmas) describe this yogini. This cakra has ten lotus petals and each petal is inscribed with another ten consonants with bindu-s (dots). The pericarp of this cakra is in the form of an inverted triangle, which is red in colour. Each of the three sides of this triangle has swastika symbol. This cakra represents the element of fire and the bīja of fire raṁ (रीं) is placed in the centre of the triangle. The bīja raṁ is extraordinarily powerful and aids in acquiring supernatural powers. This bīja is capable of providing powers of creation and destruction, depending upon its combination with other bīja-s. Most of the important bīja-s like hrīṁ, śrīṁ, etc contain raṁ bīja. This bīja is said to have the power of twelve suns. This bīja can play a vital role while formulating ātma bīja. Scriptures on kuṇḍalinī also refer this yogini as Lākinī. Meditating on this cakra gives powers for creation as well as destruction. jaṭharāgni, the internal fire that enables digestion in our body functions from this cakra. The fire that generates lust is also situated here. Normally, a fully awakened kuṇḍalinī does not descend below this cakra.

496. वदनत्रयसंयुता
Lākinī has three faces; hence, this cakra is discussed as the third cakra in this Sahasranāma.

497. वज्रादिकायुधोपेता
Lākinī has thunderbolt and other weapons. She has four arms, two of them holding a thunderbolt and a śakti weapon. The other two hands have vara mudra (a mudra that grants boon. Almost all the gods and goddesses have this mudra) and abhaya mudra (a mudra that protects by dispelling fear).

498. डामर्यादिभिरावृता
Lākinī is surrounded by ten of her assistants like Damarī.

499. रक्तवर्णा
Her complexion is blood red in colour.

500. मांसनिष्ठा
Lākinī presides over flesh. Flesh is found beneath skin and blood. This is yet another reason for Vāc Devi-s to discuss maṇipūraka cakra as the third cakra in this Sahasranāma.

501. गुडान्नप्रीतमानसा
Guḍānna refers to rice cooked with jaggery (jaggery is unprocessed sugar made out of sugarcane). Lākinī has a liking for this preparation.

502. समस्तभक्तसुखदा
Lākinī confers happiness to all the devotees of Lalitāmbikā.

503. लाकिन्यम्बास्वरूपिणी
She (the yogini) is in the form of Lākinī or her name is Lākinī. (Lākinī + ambā = mother Lākinī)

504. स्वाधिष्ठानाम्बुजगता
Yogini of svādhiṣṭāna cakra is known as Kākinī. From this nāma till nāma 513 (ten nāma-s) describes this yogini. This cakra is in coccyx area just above mūlādharā cakra and has six lotus petals. Each of these petals is inscribed with the next six consonants with bindu-s above them. The pericarp of this cakra appears like an eight petal lotus with half moon in the centre. Inside this half moon, the bīja of Varuṇa (lord of water) vaṁ (वीं) is placed. Varuṇa bīja vaṁ in proper combination with agni bīja raṁ gives certain supernatural powers. Varuṇa bīja also indicates prosperity.

505. चतुर्वक्त्रमनोहरा
Kākinī has four beautiful faces, hence described by Vāc Devi-s as the fourth cakra. Saundarya Laharī (verse 14) mentions about certain rays that radiate from the psychic centres. From mūlādhārā to ājñā cakra the verse mentions about 360 rays corresponding to 360 degrees of a circle or 360 days of a calendar year (for certain calculations the number of days per year is taken as 360 only).

506. शूलाद्यायुधसम्पन्ना
Kākinī has four hands that hold trident, noose, skull and elephant hook (aṅkuśa) as her weaponries. Some other scriptures mention conch shell, discuss, club (gada), and lotus as her weaponries. There are certain variations between Lalitā Sahasranāma and other scriptures on kuṇḍalinī about the description of the presiding deities of the cakra-s.

507. पीतवर्णा
Kākinī has golden complexion.

508. अतिगर्विता
Kākinī is extremely proud. She is proud of her beauty. But Lalitāmbikā is not proud (nāma 158. Nirmadā, says that She is without pride. When one has something that others do not have, it gives rise to pride. She has everything and everything comes out of Her.)

509. मेदोनिष्ठा
Kākinī presides over fat. Fat is fourth layer beneath our skin hence this cakra is mentioned as the fourth cakra by Vāc Devi-s.

510. मधुप्रीता
Madhu means honey. Kākinī is fond of honey. Madhu also means liquor (liquor also referes to the liquid in which vegetables or meat have been cooked) obviously indicating that Kākinī is fond of this kind of liquor. In fire rituals to appease certain goddesses, along with ghee (clarified butter), honey and milk are also mixed in small quantities. Offering honey to goddesses is also referred in the Veda-s.

511. बन्धिन्यादिसमन्विता
Kākinī is surrounded by six assistants like Bandhinī. Each of her assistants presides over each of the petals. Apart from Bandhinī, other important deities are Badhrakālī and Mahāmāyā.

512. दध्यन्नासक्तहृदया
Kākinī is fond of curd rice.

513. काकिनीरूपधारिणी
The presiding devi of svādhiṣṭhāna cakra is Kākinī who has been described in these ten nāma-s.

514. मूलाधाराम्बुजारूढा
Yogini who presides over this chakra is Sākinī, who is described in the next seven nāma-s till nāma 520. This cakra is situated at the perineum area and has four lotus petals that are red in colour. Each petal is inscribed with four consonants with bindu-s. The pericarp of this cakra is square in shape with eight spears protruding outwardly. Inside this pericarp, the bīja of this cakra laṁ (लीं) is placed. There is a red inverted triangle within the pericarp that flashes like lightning. Inside this triangle, the powerful klīṁ bīja (कलरीं), also known as kāma bīja, is placed. The bīja for earth is laṁ and this is appropriate because mūlādhāra cakra is the lowest cakra which is also known as the base cakra. Inside this triangle, there is a Liṅga (one of the prominent forms of Śiva). Kuṇḍalinī energy in the form of a snake coiled around this Liṅga three and half times. There is a hole which is called dvāra in Sanskrit in this cakra, through which Kuṇḍalinī ascends and descends. Under normal circumstances, the mouth of this hole is blocked by the head of this snake. This is the most important cakra as it holds the life energy in the form of Kuṇḍalinī here. Lalitāmbikā dwells in this cakra in the form of Kuṇḍalinī, Her subtlest form. Ancient scriptures refer the presiding deity of this cakra as Dākinī who is the presiding deity of viśuddhi cakra as per this Sahasranāma. The bīja laṁ is used for acquiring material prosperity. The other bīja klīṁ which is placed inside the triangle also gives prosperity. It is to be noted that kāmakalā (nāma 322), the subtler form of Lalitāmbikā is different from kāma bīja klīṁ referred here.

515. पञ्चवक्त्रा
Sākinī is five faced, hence described in this Sahasranāma as the fifth cakra. Each of these faces represents five elements like ākāś, air, etc. There is a yantra called pañca-vaktrā, which is five faced, which was given by Śiva to Rāvaṇa, in appreciation of his penance. This is mentioned in the epic Rāmāyaṇa,.

516. अस्थिसंस्थिता
Sākinī presides over bones, the fifth layer from the skin. This is also one of the reasons for taking up this cakra as the fifth in this Sahasranāma.

517. अङ्कुशादिप्रहरणा
Sākinī has weapons like elephant-hook. She is said to have four arms and apart from elephant-hook, she also carries lotus, book and cin mudra (mudra of knowledge or jñāna mudra). But scriptures disagree with these armories. Scriptures talk about śūla (trident), staff (a long stick with a flag tied at the top. Generally it is carried by sanyāsi -s), gourd (kamaṇḍalu, a copper or brass vessel with a nostril like opening containing water) and rudrākṣa mālā. These are the symbols of a sanyāsi.

518. वरदादिनिषेविता
Sākinī is surrounded by her assistants like Varadā and three others. The three others are Śrī (possibly indicating prosperity as Śrī means Lakṣmī), Śandā and Sarasvatī (goddess of knowledge).

519. मुद्गौदनासक्तचित्ता
Sākinī is fond of food of made of green gram. The combination of mudgaudannā is rice mixed with green gram, jaggary, coconut, jīraka, ghee and milk. For offering this to goddess, there is a specific method by which this is to be prepared.

520. साकिन्यम्बास्वरूपिणी
The presiding deity of the mūlādhāra cakra is in the form of Sākinī who has been described in these seven nāma-s.

521. आज्ञाचक्राब्जनिलया
The next seven nāma-s discuss about the presiding deity of ājñā cakra, Hākinī. Ājñā cakra is considered as the most important cakra and is located between the two eye brows. This cakra has two lotus petals and bīja-s haṁ (हीं) and kṣaṁ (क्षीं) are inscribed in those white petals. The yogini’s complexion is white and she has six faces with three eyes on each, all red in colour. She has six arms and is majestically seated on a white lotus. Each of her six hands holds varada mudra (granting boons), abhaya mudra (dispelling fear), a rudrākṣa rosary, a human skull, a small drum and a book. The mind in its subtlest forms dwells here. The most important bīja of all, ॐ is placed here and when kuṇḍalinī reaches this cakra, superhuman powers are granted to the practitioner. The pericarp is in the form of inverted triangle. Above this triangle, a half moon is located. During proper meditation on ājñā cakra, the first illumination would be only a half moon, above the triangle. This moon transforms into an illuminating flame during further progress in meditation, indicating the progress of Self-realization. The illumination of the flame is extraordinarily bright because sun, moon and fire unite in this cakra (iḍa, piṅgala and suṣumna). Both Śaktī and Śiva begin to manifest here. One’s guru lineage is worshipped in this cakra. Guru, irrespective of the place of his existence, gives command to his disciples through this cakra. These are the words of Kṛṣṇa in Bhagavad Gīta (VIII.9, 10): “One should know the Brahman as the knower of all in inconceivable form, shining like the sun, beyond all materialistic attributes. One who at the time of death by his yogic powers fixes his consciousness between his two eye brows (ājñā cakra), with mind fixed on the Brahman attains Him.”

522. शुक्लवर्णा
Hākinī has fair complexion. This could be due to the purity of ājñā cakra.

523. षडानना
Hākinī has six faces and hence described as the sixth cakra in this Sahasranāma. Ājñā cakra is the controlling centre for the five lower cakra-s, each of which representing five mahā bhūta-s or elements. Ājñā cakra, the sixth cakra controls the mind. Hence, Hākinī is described with six faces, one representing mind and other five representing five elements, particularly tanmātra-s such as sound, taste, etc.

524. मज्जासंस्था
Hākinī presides over bone marrow, the sixth layer from the skin hence ājñā cakra is discussed as the sixth cakra in this Sahasranāma.

525. हंसवतीमुख्यशक्तिसमन्विता
Hākinī is attended by two of her assistants. They are Haṁsavati and Kṣamāvati, representing the two bīja-s haṁ (हीं) and kṣaṁ (क्षीं). In all these cakra-s, the names of the assistants to the yogini-s begin with the respective alphabets inscribed in the lotus petals of the concerned cakra-s. Alphabets, complexion of the yogini-s, faces and hands of the yogini-s, the shape of the pericarp of the cakra-s have great relevance to the attributes assigned to these cakra-s.

526. हरिद्रान्नैकरसिका
Hākinī is fond of rice cooked with saffron.

527. हाकिनीरूपधारिणी
The yogini who has been described in the preceding six nāma-s is known as Hākinī.

528. सहस्रदलपद्मस्था
The next seven nāma-s discuss about yogini Yākinī, the last among the yogini-s who are being discussed. Sahasrāra or the crown cakra is presided by yogini Yākinī. Sahasrāra is in the form of a thousand petal lotus. This is not categorized under cakra-s and sahasrāra is difficult to explain. The commune (the divine energy) between the soul and the cosmos happens through an extremely small aperture at the top of the head known as brahmarandhra (ब्रह्मरन्द्र). This pericarp of the sahasrāra is said to be more lustrous than a full moon. The rays of this moon is multi coloured, predominantly VIBGYOR, the seven colours of the rain bow. The colour of these cakra-s begin with red at mūlādhāra, orange at svādhiṣṭhāna, yellow at maṇipūra, green at anāhata, blue at viśuddhi, indigo at ājñā and violet at sahasrāra. Though violet is said to be the overriding colour of sahasrāra, multi colour is visible during its activation. Śaktī-s union with Śiva takes place here. There is a bindu in the midst of sahasrāra and is called śūnya, or emptiness which is the root of liberation and is in the size of a ten millionth of the width of human hair. Śiva is manifested here as the pure Brahman, and Śaktī conjoins Him unfolding eternal bliss leading to final liberation. The mind that was totally purified at ājñā cakra begins to realise the oneness of self (ātma) and the Brahman (paramātma). The practitioner who could activate this orifice is not born again. He is freed from all his karma-s. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (XVIII.49), “A person can attain liberation by freeing himself from karma-s by practicing renunciation.” At this stage, the practitioner does not use his free will (surrenders his free will to God) and functions only at the will of God. Such a situation is possible only if sahasrāra is well activated. Śaktī who has ascended from mūlādhāra unites with Śiva at sahasrāra and the blissful ambrosia is released and is felt at the throat, providing the divine nourishment which makes the practitioner to realise “I am That”, indicating the end of one’s spiritual quest. The union of Śaktī (I) and Śiva (That) takes place here in their subtlest forms. All the alphabets are placed continuously in all the petals of the lotus. It is also said that the alphabet kṣa (क्ष) is excluded from the fifty one alphabets of Sanskrit, thereby making it only fifty letters. These fifty alphabets are placed twenty times in succession to make one thousand. The feet of the Brahman (some refer this as the feet of one’s Guru and either way there is no differentiation in the subject conveyed as Guru and the Brahman are not different) is worshipped here causing removal of sañcita karma (the total sum of karma of all previous births that have not yet fructified). In the pericarp of sahasrāra there is a moon and inside this moon there is a triangle and inside this triangle, there is unmani, a tattva that nullifies all the adversities of mind. Unmani is explained as the supranormal Śaktī of Paramaśiva in its primal movement towards manifestation, though inseparable from Him and is known as unmanā or unmani This is one of the foremost reasons for attaining bliss, as the influences on mind is overruled here.

529. सर्ववर्णोपशोभिता
Yākinī shines in all colours. varṇa also indicates letters that are inscribed in the one thousand petals. There is also an interpretation that letters are placed first from a (अ) to kṣa (क्ष) and then kṣa (क्ष) to a (अ) and again from अ to क्ष and so on.

530. सर्वायुधधरा
Yākinī has all types of weaponries. In sahasrāra, everything is infinite because sahasrāra is beyond any human explanation. Further, the experience at sahasrāra will differ from person to person. Śrī Rudraṁ (Yajur Veda IV.v.10.verse 12) says ‘a thousand fold in thousands are the missiles in your arms.’ Such references are available in plenty in Veda-s and Upaniṣads.

531. शुक्लसंस्थिता
Yākinī is in the form of subtlest product of the human body – semen or ova. Yākinī represents the creation of human body and destruction of the human mind.

532. सर्वतोमुखी
Yākinī has infinite faces. ‘Infinite faces facing all directions’ is the concept of the Brahman. Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (I.13) says “having eyes everywhere, having hands everywhere, having feet everywhere.” Bhagavad Gīta XIII.13 says “He dwells in the world, enveloping all, His hands and feet present everywhere. His eyes and ears, His mouth and heads present on all sides.” Puruṣa sūktaṁ opens by saying “Puruṣa (the Brahman) has thousands of heads, thousands of eyes, thousands of feet.” How does that Puruṣa appear, answers Bhagavad Gīta XI.12 by saying “if a thousand suns appeared simultaneously in the sky, they might dimly resemble Him.”

533. सर्वौदनप्रीतचित्ता
Yākinī likes all types of food. The important point to be noted with sahasrāra is the nature infinitude. The yogini presiding over sahasrāra is beyond everything.

534. याकिन्यम्बास्वरूपिणी
Yogini presiding over sahasrāra is known as mother Yākinī, who has been described from nāma 528 till 534 (7 nāma-s). With this, the description of yogini-s is concluded

535. स्वाहा
After describing yogini-s, Vāc Devi-s continue with their description of Lalitāmbikā. Lalitāmbikā is in the form of oblations offered to gods and goddesses. The mantra-s for such oblations end with svāhā. More details are provided in the next nāma. Liṅga Purāṇa (13.9) says wife of Paśupatī (the fiery form of Śiva) in the form of fire is Svāhā and the mother of Lord Kārttikeya.

536. स्वधा
She is in the form of oblations offered to the departed souls of ancestors (pitṛ) and such mantra-s end with svadhā. Mārkaṇḍeya Purāṇa (26.6-9) personifies a grahasta (a married man leading family life) as a holy cow. Cow’s back is Rig Veda, her loins is Yajur Veda, her face and neck is Sāma Veda, her horns are pious acts, her hair are the words of wise men, her ordure and urine are tranquillity and prosperity, her four feet are the four classes of humanity, svāhā, svadhā, vaṣaṭ, and hanta are her teats. The epic proceeds to say that such a man should nourishe gods, ṛṣi-s, pitṛ-s, fellow men and other living beings as his own body (This act of a grahasta is called pañca-yajña. (refer nāma 946 pañca-yajñapriyā). It is also said that Svāhā and Svadhā are the two wives of Lord Agni.

537. अमतिः
She is in the form of avidyā or ignorance. The creation in the beginning was devoid of consciousness, known as avyakta form (nāma 398). From mūlaprakṛti (nāma 397) avyakta, mahat (intellect), (nāma 774) ego, etc were created. The intellect in such un-manifested stage is known as amati. This is the stage of prakṛti where all the three guṇa-s are found in equilibrium. Any change in this equilibrium of guṇa-s in prakṛti leads to desire, wisdom and action.

538. मेधा
She in the form of amati, transforms into medha or intelligence, along with evolution. This is also to confirm Her existence from the beginning of creation. These two nāma-s explain the development of intellect from its un-manifested form to manifested form. She is in the form of both, which go to prove Her Brahman form or the omnipresence nature. Medha particularly refers to individual intelligence. Mahānārāyaṇa Upaniṣad (49.1) says “May the all-penetrating goddess of intellect who is beneficial, favorably disposed to and delighting in us, visit us” (Medha sūktaṁ 1). Atharva Veda (VI.108) says “Oh! Wisdom (medha)! Come first to us with cows, with horses, you with the sun’s rays, you are reverent to us. The next verse proceeds to say “I call first, unto the aid of gods, wisdom filled with Brahman, quickened by Brahman, praised by seers………” Intellect is considered as one of the important factors to realise the Brahman. She is said to be in the form of such an intellect.

539. श्रुतिः
Śruti means Veda-s. She is in the form of all the four Veda-s or all the Veda-s represent Her form.

540. स्मृतिः
Veda-s are difficult to understand and the message of the Brahman is conveyed through them in secretive manner. Veda-s need proper interpretation to understand their conveyance. Smṛti-s, derived from Veda-s deliver the message of the Brahman in understandable terms. She is in the form of such Smṛti-s. Smṛti also refers to the power of recollection and memory. Upaniṣads are classified under Smṛti-s. Kṛṣṇa says (Bhagavad Gīta X.34) “I am the power of speech, memory, intelligence, grasping faculty……..”

541. अनुत्तमा
No one is superior to Her, an exclusive of the qualitiy of the Brahman. This situation is best explained in Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (VI.8) which says “No one is His equal; no one is superior either. He possesses many gifts of a high order.” The same situation finds a place in Bhagavad Gīta (XI.43). “Unparalleled by any other in the three worlds, who may surpass Him, the Lord of power incomparable.” Anuttamā also means intellect not derived from others. She is the embodiment of intellect.

542. पुण्यकीर्तिः
She is known for virtues. She gives fame to Her devotees. The very thought of Her, sanctifies a person. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma nāma 688 is Puṇyakīrti which means He is capable of eradicating sins of His devotees.

543. पुण्यलभ्या
She is attainable through virtues. Puṇya means virtues. It is said that ‘She is attained by those who are virtuous and have knowledge of Veda-s. Those who are desirous do not see Her.’ Saundarya Laharī (verse 1) explains this. ‘You are worshiped even by Brahma, Viṣṇu and Rudra. Unless one has accumulated virtues of previous births (good karma-s), how can anyone be capable of singing Your praise or prostrate before You.’

544. पुण्यश्रवणकीर्तना
Recitation of verses in praise of Her (like this Lalitā Sahasranāma), or listening to such praises are virtuous acts. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma 922 conveys the same meaning. The uttarabhāga (the concluding part) of Viṣṇu Sahasranāma verse 2 and the concluding part of this Lalitā Sahasranāma also conveys the same meaning.

545. पुलोमजार्चिता
Indrāṇī is the wife of Lord Indra and Her father is known by name Puloman. She is an ardent devotee of Lalitāmbikā. This nāma is included in this Sahasranāma to highlight the importance of morality and the benefits attained on worshipping Lalitāmbikā. This nāma means that She is worshipped by the daughter of Puloman, i.e. Indrāṇī There is a story in Devi Bhāgavata (chapter VI) which goes like this: There was a demon by name Puloman. He had a daughter known as Śaśī. Indrā killed Puloman and married his daughter Śaśī. Thus, Śaśī became Indrāṇī. Indra befriended with another demon by name Vṛiddāsura. Vṛiddāsura’s father Dvaṣṭā forewarned his son not to entertain friendship with Indra. As the fate would have it, Vṛiddāsura did not listen to his father’s advice. At an appropriate time, Indra killed the demon with the help of Lalitai, Viṣṇu and others. Since Indra killed his friend through foul means, he was afflicted with brahmahatyā doṣa (sins accruing on account of murdering a Vedic scholar) as cursed by Dvaṣṭā. Nobody came to his rescue. When Viṣṇu and Lalitai helped Indra, everyone helped him. But when Viṣṇu and Lalitai were no longer willing to help him, none came forward to help him. As a result, Indra left his empire, came to the earth and started living in a lotus stem. Nobody could find him. The absence of Indra was felt in the universe. There was no rain which resulted in acute famine all over. Demigods, goddesses and sages appointed a demon by name Nahuṣa for the post of Indra, to overcome the famine. Nahuṣa, impressed by the beauty of Indrāṇī wanted to flirt with her. Knowing this Indrāṇī went to Brahma. He could not offer a lasting solution. Then along with demigods, etc Indrāṇī went to Viṣṇu for a solution. Viṣṇu advised all of them to worship Parāśaktī. With Her grace, Indra was found by Indrāṇī. Indrāṇī told Indra that her chastity is in jeopardy with Nahuṣa occupying Indra’s throne. Indra told her that their time is not auspicious and that she should go back to Indraloka. He also told her that to protect a woman’s chastity nobody can be of help except her own will power and determination. She went back to Indraloka and told Nahuṣa that she would oblige him if he comes to her place in a palanquin carried by the seven great sages (sapta riṣi-s). Accordingly, Nahuṣa summoned sapta riṣi-s. Sapta riṣi-s obliged Nahuṣa as they were aware of what is in store for Nahuṣa. Out of the seven riṣi-s, Agastya was very short and when he walked with the palanquin, it tilted towards his side. Angered by this, Nahuṣa beat Agastya and kept his foot on his head. Agastya is a very powerful sage who had once consumed the entire water of all the oceans. Agastya cursed Nahuṣa to become a python and immediately he fell down in a forest with the body of a python. Knowing this, Indra returned to his kingdom. Indra was restored to his throne with the grace of Lalitāmbikā.

546. बन्धमोचनी
She liberates from bondage. Bondage is caused by ignorance or avidyā. Bondage means a soul remaining afflicted by desires and attachments. She removes such bondage for those who surrender to Her, beginning of the process of liberation.

547. बर्बरालका
In some texts, this nāma is mentioned as bandhūrālakā. She has curly hair that appears like waves and flowing into Her forehead.

548. विमर्शरूपिणी
Brahman is the combination of prakāśa and vimarśa forms. Prakāśa is the Self-illuminating light the origin of which is not known. It is the beginning of creation or creation begins from prakāśa. Without this Self illuminating eternal light, nothing can exist. It is Śiva. The reflection of Śiva is known as vimarśa, which is known as Śaktī. Without the presence of vimarśa or Śaktī, Śiva cannot act. Śiva is the creator and Śaktī is the doer. It is said that ‘if ultimate Reality were merely prakāśa without vimarśa, it would be hibernating.’ Without Śiva or prakāśa form of the Brahman, the presence of Śaktī or vimarśa of the Brahman is not possible. Without Śaktī or vimarśa of the Brahman, the creation is not possible as without Śaktī, Śiva becomes inert. Śiva is devoid of activity with singular exception of Śaktī got abstracted from Śiva. That is why soul is said to the representative of Śiva, as soul on its own cannot act unless combined with prakṛti or Nature. If Śiva can be called as the Brahman, then Śaktī is to be called māyā. Without the presence of māyā, activities in the universe cannot happen, as māyā is the expressive nature of the Brahman. This appears logical as the Creator status of the Brahman is not divested. Though Śiva has desired to create, He executes His acts of creation only through Śaktī which makes Śaktī the most sought after form of the Brahman. Śaktī in Her capacity as the administrator of the universe has multifarious activities such as creation, sustenance, fusion, total dissolution and finally re-creation (nāma 274). Śiva therefore is the static energy and Śaktī becomes the kinetic energy. When these two energies join together it known as ‘Śiva-Śaktī’ (nāma 999) or Ardhanārīśvara form (half male and half female) This nāma mentions Her creative aspect.

549. विद्या
Vidyā means ‘to deliberate’. She is the giver of knowledge that is capable of providing final liberation. This is an extension of the previous nāma. After having spoken about Her vast powers in the previous nāma, Vāc Devi-s talk about the final liberation in this nāma, which can be granted only by Her. Final liberation cannot be attained without understanding the Brahman for which the highest form of pure knowledge or Śuddhavidyā is required. This nāma says either She is in the form of that supreme knowledge or She gives that supreme knowledge for those who seek it. Śiva Sūtra 21 says, Śuddhavidyodayāccakreśatvasiddhiḥ (शगद्धववद्योदयाच्चक्रेशत्वलसवद्धः). “Full acquisition of mastery over the collective whole of the śaktī-s through the appearance of Śuddhavidyā or pure knowledge.” It is said that She is the highest of vidyā-s and on the appearance of this vidyā, a practitioner acquires infinite knowledge and siddhi-s. This becomes possible because, by providing this pure knowledge She makes a person to think about Śiva in the form of primordial light, thereby becoming Śiva Himself. Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad talks about two types of knowledge, one is apara the lowest and another is parā the highest. She is in the form of this parā knowledge.

550. वियदादि जगत्प्रसूः
She is the Creator of the five principles of ākāś (ether) air, etc. According to Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II.1) “From that Self (the Brahman) sprang up ākāś, from ākāś air, from air fire, from fire water and from water earth.” During great dissolution, the reverse process unfolds.” She is referred as that Self or the Brahman. This nāma augurs well with nāma 397 mūlaprakṛti.

551. सर्वव्याधिप्रशमनी
She cures all diseases. By sarva-vyādhi it means disease of both body and mind. It is not enough to have purity of mind alone. One need to have a healthy body to realise the Brahman within. The divine energy is extraordinarily powerful and body should have the stamina to withstand the cosmic energy. Nāma 876 nirāmayā says that She is without disease.

552. सर्वमृत्युनिवारिणी
Mṛtyu means death. There are different types of deaths such as premature death arising out of accidents, disease or untimely deaths. Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (IV.15) explains about death thus: “If you know your oneness with Him, you become free from shackles of death.” Kaṭha Upaniṣad (I.iii.15) also endorses this view. “Having known that Self, one can be free from death.” The concept of self-realisation is conveyed in this nāma. If one becomes immortal, it is against the laws of the Divine. Mṛtyu means averting rebirths. Birth and death is only for gross bodies. When immortality (eternal) is referred, it always means the Supreme Self. A soul manifests in the form of gross body to undergo pleasure or pain according to its karmic account. At the time of death, soul leaves the body and enters another body till its entire karmic account is exhausted. The death here indicates the final liberation of the soul to merge with the Brahman. The nāma means that She is liberator of such souls. Karma is like fuel of a vehicle. The vehicle runs till the fuel lasts. Fuel is the karmic account and the vehicle is the body. The quantum of distance traversed by the vehicle is directly related to fuel. Similarly, the karmic account determines the duration of a bodily form.

553. अग्रगण्या
She is the First, first among the entire creation. Śiva has no parentage. Śiva created Her in the form of kinetic power to create and sustain this universe. This nāma refers to Her own creation. At the time of first creation, none was there except Śiva and Śaktī. At the time of annihilation only Śiva and Śaktī alone remain. Śiva and Śaktī continue to remain during the end of one yug and the commencement of next yug (discussed in nāma 555.) Śivananda Laharī (verse 100) conveys the same meaning. “Gods like Brahma know You as the first amongst the most worshipful ones. You are known as the best among the best of grains.”

554. अचिन्त्यरूपा
She is in inconceivable form, a quality of the Brahman. Reference can also be made to nāma-s 139 and 415 which say that She is beyond comprehension by mind. This is one of the unique qualities of the Brahman and confirms that the Brahman is amorphous and omnipresent. She is beyond all qualities and guṇa-s. Forms appear only if the soul interacts with prakṛti along with elements. She is the embodiment of all souls and She Herself is the prakṛti. A soul is known as puruṣa and is supposed to be masculine. On the other hand prakṛti is described as feminine. Any creation unfolds only if puruṣa and prakṛti conjoin which accentuates the significance of Śiva-Śaktī union in the form of Liṅga, and considered as not only powerful, but also highly auspicious.

555. कलिकल्मषनाशिनी
She destroys the sins committed during kali yug. The following reading from Mārkaṇḍeya Purāṇa (Chapter 43 Verses 26-30) is about the duration of each yug. At the end of each yug the total dissolution takes place and the next re-creation is known by the succeeding yug. Currently we are going through 5111th year of kali yug ((2010-11) out of 360,000 human years. “360 human years is equal to one divine year. 12,000 divine years (4,320,000 human years) consists the four ages called Kṛita yug (4000 divine years), Tretā yug (3000 divine years), Dvāpara yug (2000 divine years) and Kali yug (1000 divine years). The balance of 2000 divine years has been calculated for twilight period of each yug.” Out of the four, kali yug is supposed to have more sinners and She in the form of Goddess Kali destroys sins committed during kali yug.” An age of the world, long mundane period of years, of which the first three have already elapsed, while the Kali, which began at midnight between the 17th and 18th of Feb. 3102 B. C. is that in which we live. The duration of each is said to be respectively 1,728,000, 1,296,000, 864,000, and 432,000 years of men, the descending numbers representing a similar physical and moral deterioration of men in each age. The four Yuga-s comprise an aggregate of 4,320,000 years and constitute a great Yuga or Mahāyug.

556. कात्यायनी
She is the sum total of the effulgence (tejas) of all gods and goddesses. Vāma Purāṇa says that brightness which is the best is known by the name Kātyāyanī. Kātyāyanī is the presiding deity of oḍyāṇa pīṭhā, situated at ājñā cakra. Other pīṭhā-s are kāma giri pīṭhā at mūlādhāra cakra, pūrṇa giri pīṭhā at anāhata cakra, jālandhara pīṭhā at viśuddhi cakra. There is another interpretation. ka (क) means Brahma, the Creator or head or a stone. She rests on this ka; (with particular reference to stone meaning the universe) therefore She is known as Kātyāyanī.

557. कालहन्त्री
Kāla means death. She is the destroyer of death. She destroys death for those who are Self-realized. Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad says kālakāraḥ, which means that the Brahman is the creator of time. Death occurs only when the soul is about to transcend its prescribed time fixed by the law of karma also known as the law of the Lord. Please refer nāma 552 sarva-mṛtyu-nivāriṇī for additional details. The unique nature of this Sahasranāma is no nāma has been repeated. But there are instances where the same meaning has been conveyed through more than one nāma. This is to emphasize the importance of certain activities that are considered as more important. For example through nāma-s 552 and 557 it is said that She destroys death. The secretive meaning of these nāma-s is Selfrealisation. Those who have realized Her within transcends death, which means that they are not reborn. Every living being born in this universe has to necessarily undergo the process of death, the dissolution of the respective physical bodies. Self-realization can be attained by removing avidyā or ignorance.

558. कमलाक्षनिषेविता
She is worshiped by Viṣṇu, the lotus eyed. Saundarya Laharī (verse 5) confirms this by saying haristvām ārādhyā meaning Viṣṇu worshiped you. It is said that Viṣṇu by worshipping Her, got His mohinī (nāma 562) form (form of a woman) to destroy the demons. Possibly sanctity of the woman hood is highlighted by Vāc Devi-s in this nāma. Women are always treated as sacred attributes by Indian scriptures. Kamalākṣa means lotus eyed. Viṣṇu has beautiful eyes resembling lotus flower.

559. ताम्बूलपूरितमुखी
She is fond of chewing betel leaves with karpūra vīṭikā (nāma 26). The betel leaves turn Her lips into red colour. This nāma says that Her face shines with betel leaves In Her mouth. The fragrance of betel leaves with karpūra vīṭikā emanates pleasing fragrance.

560. दाडिमीकुसुमप्रभा
She radiates like a pomegranate flower. They are dark red in colour. The flowers of pomegranate are considered as the most auspicious amongst the flowers for worshipping Her. Next is hibiscus flower, which too has deep red petals and is widely used for worshipping Her. The last verse of Abhirāmi andhādhī (A poetize consisting of 100 Tamil verses in praise of Her. This is more or less like Saundarya Laharī) also compares pomegranate flower to Her complexion. Everything associated with Her is red. Her red complexion has been repeatedly emphasized in this Sahasranāma. The reason for such repetitions is provided in nāma 557.

561. मृगाक्षी
Her eyes appear like that of a deer. Since the description of the Brahman is not possible, a reference is always made to the best known object. A deer’s eyes look gorgeous and will always be revolving, glancing at all the sides at the same time. Lalitāmbikā being the administrator of the entire universe looks all-round for two reasons. First, She administers the universe by personally overseeing all the activities. Secondly, while doing so, She liberates Her true devotees by glancing at them. She does not want them to wait even for a second to attain liberation. She grants them liberation by a mere glance. Lalitā triśatī nāma 103 hariṇekṣṇā conveys the same meaning.

562. मोहिनी
She bewitches. Unable to find proper words to describe Her beauty, Vāc Devi-s used this word. Bewitchment is not possible without being splendiferous. She is the beauty incarnate, because Her beauty is made up of knowledge, efficiency and compassion. When Viṣṇu got His mohinī form by worshipping Her, He bewitched the demons (refer nāma 558).

563. मुख्या
She is the first in the universe. Mukhya also means important. She is authoritative amongst all gods and goddesses. Taittirīya Upaniṣad (III.x.6) says “I am That which was born before anything. I was born before the gods and goddesses”. This nāma says that She is not only first among the creations, but also part of creation itself and assumes importance amongst all gods and goddesses.

564. मृडानी
Mṛḍa means Śiva. Consort of Mṛḍa is Mṛḍānī. It also means giver of happiness that is provided by the vimarśa form of Śiva, i.e. Śaktī.

565. मित्ररूपिणी
Mitra means a friend. Sun is considered as a friend of the universe, as it sustains existence. She is in the form of sun. Sun is the best friend of all organisms. In Śrī vidyā worship, Śiva is represented by agni, Śaktī is represented by moon and the union of Śiva-Śaktī is represented by sun. This nāma indicates Her closeness and easy accessibility to those who seek Her.

566. नित्यतृप्ता
She remains eternally contended, because She has no requirements. Non-requirement is one of the qualities of the Brahman. It is said “That is infinite and this is infinite. The infinite proceeds from the infinite, taking the infinite of the infinite, it remains as the infinite alone.” Because She being infinite, She remains eternally contended. Nāma 815 is anitya-tṛptā, (this is a typical example of usage of double negatives to mean a positive factor) which means She is contended even with perishable offerings. Based on this interpretation, the present nāma can be explained as ‘She remains contended with eternal non-perishable offering, which is Ātman.’

567. भक्तनिधिः
She is the treasure house for Her devotees. She shares this treasure with Her devotees whenever sought for vide nāma 989.

568. नियन्त्री
She is the guide to the universe. Since She administers the universe, She is addressed in this nāma as its guide.

569. निखिलेश्वरी
This is an extension of the previous nāma. Because of being the only guide to the universe, a quality of the Brahman, She assumes the position of Supreme Ruler, which is conveyed in this nāma. Nikhila means complete or total.

570. मैत्र्यादिवासनालभ्या
She can be attained through qualities like kindness, etc. Patañjali yoga sūtra I.33 says “Friendship, mercy, gladness and indifference being thought of in regard to subjects, happy, unhappy and good and evil respectively, pacify the mind stuff.” For attaining perfection, one has to remove evil thoughts. One should not become felicitous on knowing the sufferings of another. One should not become jealous on knowing the wealth of another. When someone is suffering, one has to help him to come out of his sufferings. Converting hatred into love, converting sadness into happiness etc are some of the ways to attain perfection. But practicing positivism to countervail the effects of negativities, mind attains perfection, which leads to the stage of samādhi. Such devotees can easily reach the stage of bliss and ultimate merger with the Brahman (kaivalya). This nāma says that She can be attained by developing positive thoughts. She can be attained by positive vāsanā-s or impressions.

571. महाप्रलयसाक्षिणी
Mahā-pralaya is the total dissolution that has been discussed in nāma 232 maheśvara-mahākalpa-mahā-tāṇḍava-sākṣiṇī. When annihilation unfolds, the entire universe gets dissolved into Śiva. This happens exactly in the reverse process of creation. At the time of creation ākāś was born out of the Brahman, air was born out of ākāś, etc. At the time of annihilation, air gets dissolved into ākāś and ākāś gets dissolved into Śiva. This process is known as involution as opposed to evolution, a process that happens during creation. This nāma says that She is the only witness to the great dissolution. Such a great dissolution unfolds at the command of Śiva. He begins His famous cosmic dance during annihilation. Macrocosm gets dissolved into Śiva and She is the only witness to such a mind boggling event. Saundarya Laharī (verse 26) describes this event. “Brahma, Viṣṇu, Yama, Kubera, Indra all gets annihilated. But your consort Śiva plays around with you.”

572. पराशक्तिः
She is Parāśaktī. Consort of Paramaśiva is Parāśaktī. She is the supreme (parā) Śaktī. Reference to nāma 366 parā can be made. In a human body there are ten substances called dhātu-s. Skin, blood, flesh, fat and bone originated from Śaktī. Marrow, semen/ova, prāṇa and jīva (soul) originated from Śiva. The tenth dhātu is Paraśaktī. Śiva can manifest only if He is conjoined with Śaktī. This is explained in Saundarya Laharī (verse 1) which says, ‘Śiva united with Śaktī, becomes able to manifest. Otherwise, Śiva cannot even pulsate.’ Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (VI.8) says ‘He possesses powers of knowledge and powers of action, all of which are natural to Him’. This is not possible for Him without His Śaktī. Parā-trīśikā-vivaraṇa (an ancient treatise of Kashmir Saivism) says the following. “The revered goddess and the supreme divine consciousness that at once transcends three divisions of creation, sustenance and destruction is Parāśaktī. She moves freely in all fields of knowledge. Entire universal existence has two aspects. One is the original universe and another is its reflection. The original universe is Parāśaktī and the entire manifestation is said to be Her expression. In the womb of Parāśaktī lies parā-vāc, from where the speech originates. The reduced consciousness, because of its retention within itself of all objectivity, is like the udder of celestial cow kāmadhenu. It upholds the multitude of entire objectivity, becomes manifest, wide spreading jñāna śaktī. Without bringing about the limited experience of the knower and known, reside in the pure state of awareness, it is the perfect Parāśaktī of seventeen kalās. “ Parāśaktī is the Supreme Divine kinetic energy and His mirror image which becomes responsible for all the acts of Divine. It is said in Liṅga Purāṇa that powers of all objects of existence in the universe is Śaktī and the objects themselves are Śiva.

573. परानिष्ठा
Niṣṭha means steadfast position. The mind of a self realized person becomes steadfast, perpetually united with the Brahman. For reaching this stage, the highest level of knowledge is required. Kṛṣṇa explains this in Bhagavad Gītā (IV.33). “Sacrifice performed with knowledge is superior to material sacrifices. All actions (cause, effect and karma) consummated in entirety in knowledge.” For changing over from external rituals to internal search, knowledge is important. Without acquiring such supreme knowledge, one continues to be associated with materialistic rituals failing to realize the Brahman within. The latter is capable of giving salvation at a faster pace than the former, which is an extremely slow process. Internal search requires nothing except a steadfast mind whereas for the materialistic rituals time, space and wealth become essential requirements. The kind of knowledge can be obtained only from ancient scriptures. Particularly, Upaniṣad-s provide extraordinary inputs to understand the Brahman and seek Him within. The acquiring of knowledge leads to experience. When this knowledge and experience turns steadfast, it is called parā-niṣṭhā. She is in the form of parā-niṣṭhā. Without Her help, reaching this stage is not possible. She is the embodiment of power (parā-śaktī) and knowledge (parā-niṣṭhā).

574. प्रज्ञानघनरुपिणी
An extension of the previous nāma, which said that knowledge and experience are the essential components for self-realisation. This nāma goes to explain the kind of knowledge discussed in the previous nāma. Prajāna-ghana-rūpiṇī means concentration of superior knowledge. Superior concentrated knowledge means the knowledge that remains unpolluted by ignorance. Knowledge becomes polluted by senses. Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (V.v.15) says “the Self without interior or exterior. It is entire and pure intelligence alone.” When everything dissolves into this pure knowledge, Self-realisation begins to happen. She is in the form of such pure and concentrated knowledge.

575. माध्वीपानालसा
She is in languorous stage, because of consuming an intoxicated drink made out of honey (some texts quote that it is mixture of grape extract and honey). The secretive meaning of this nāma is that She is in a state of samādhi and enjoying the ultimate bliss. She always meditates on Her creator Śiva. During the higher levels of kuṇḍalinī meditation, a honey like fluid, generally called ambrosia drips into throat, also known as madhu (madhu means honey) because of its taste and viscosity that resemble honey. Madhu is known as spiritual intoxicant and said to possess intoxicating qualities of eight kinds. The secretion of ambrosia happens in the stage of bliss where a person remains lackadaisical as his consciousness remains fixed with the Brahman. She is said to be in this stage of bliss, the eternal happiness. Though this nāma is interpreted as above, in reality She is the cause of bliss. Without Her knowledge, blissfulness cannot be attained. This nāma confirms earlier discussions that She gives what She has. She is the possessor of everything and She is capable of giving anything.

576. मत्ता
Because of consuming the drink referred in the previous nāma, She is in the stage of intoxication. This intoxication is because of the reasons given in the previous nāma. It is also said that She represents ego of Śiva. Since She is in the stage of introversion, She appears inebriated. These two nāma-s possibly elucidate the stage of bliss and its importance. Bliss can be attained by either progressing in kuṇḍalinī meditation or remaining as an introvert and exploring the Self within.

577. मातृकावर्णरूपिणी
She is in the form of 51 alphabets of Sanskrit called matṛkā. These fifty alphabets are split into six groups and worshipped in the six cakra-s from mūlādhāra to ājñā. These alphabets have different colours and is said to be closely related to cosmological studies. A comparative narration is drawn between Śiva and Śaktī and vowels and consonants. Vowels are always active and dynamic in nature and therefore vowels are compared to Śaktī; consonants are compared to Śiva. Without Śiva-Śaktī combine, the universe cannot exist, as they are two different aspects of the Brahman. In the same way, sound cannot exist without vowels-consonants combine. The sound originates from Śabda Brahman whereas the universe originates from the Brahman. She is the Śabda Brahman. She wears a garland made up of fifty one alphabets, which was discussed in nāma 489 akṣa-māladi-dharā. Another interpretation says that She is the Mother (matṛkā) of all letters (varṇa-rūpinī). This theory goes to prove that She is the creator of all the alphabets. These alphabets are the foundation of Śrī Cakra. Based upon the theory that Śrī Cakra is a human body, these alphabets form the foundation of human existence. The difference between animals and man is the decoding and understanding of sound, which becomes possible because of Śabda Brahman. Meditating on matṛkā-s and Śrī Cakra as one, is a way of worshipping Śrī Cakra. This is called Kailāsa prastāra. There are two more prastāra-s. They are meruprastāra where tithi nitya devi-s and Śrī Cakra are meditated upon as one and meditating Vāc devi-s (authors of this Sahasranāma) and Śrī Cakra as one is called bhū-prastāra. Prastāra means flight of steps.Please refer nāma 833 for Sanskrit alphabets.

578. महाकैलासनिलया
Mahā-kailāsa is the abode of Śiva. This is far away from the existing Kailāsa mountains. In fact, mahā-kailāsa is beyond human comprehension. Śiva has various forms and mahā-kailāsa is the abode of Paramaśiva. Since Lalitāmbikā is always present with Śiva, mahā-kailāsa is referred to as the abode of Lalithāi as well. This interpretation is given in epics. The orifice (bindu) in sahasrāra is known as mahā-kailāsa. Sahasrāra is beyond the six-cakra-s (mūlādhāra to ājñā) in the human body. Śiva is visualised here in the form of a bindu (dot). Since She conjoins Śiva here in Her subtlest form, it is also referred as Her abode. In the previous nāma three prastāra-s were discussed and one among them was Kailāsa prastāra, which is beyond the reach of Vāc Devi-s, the authors of this Sahasranāma. They have used prefix mahā to mean Her best qualities and there are thirty seven such nāma-s in this Sahasranāma.

579. मृणालमृदुदोर्लता
Her arms are tender like lotus stalks. Her subtlest form is kuṇḍalinī. This form is compared to that of a lotus stem in nāma 111.

580. महनीया
She is adorable. Whatever praise one showers on Her, She becomes worthy of it. Possibly this could be the reason for using prefix mahā (great) in a number of nāma-s.

581. दयामूर्तिः
She is the embodiment of compassion, which is one of Her predominant qualities. This is the reason for commencing this Sahasranāma with Śrī Mātā, the compassionate mother of the universe. To emphasize Her compassion, this quality has been repeated in nāma-s 197, 326 and 992. Compassion becomes Her predominant quality because She also sustains those who do not think about Her even for a moment. This means that they are losing out opportunities of liberation, offered by Her.

582. महासाम्राज्यशालिनी
She magnificently controls all the planets forming part of this universe. Normally sāmrājya refers to cluster of kingdoms. For Her, kingdoms mean planets and earth forming only a tiny part of the universe controlled by Her. Even the mahā-kailāsa is ruled by Her in Her capacity as the consort of Śiva.

583. आत्मविद्या
This nāma and the next two nāma-s talk about three types of vidyā-s (knowledge). Ātma vidyā means the knowledge about the Brahman, Brahma vidyā. Brahman is also known as Ātman. Nāma 727 is Śiva jñāna pradāyinī, which means that She imparts knowledge on Śiva who is known as the Brahman without attributes. Since She imparts knowledge (vidyā) of the Supreme Ātman, she is addressed as Ātmavidyā. Turya Gāyatrī is also said be Ātma-vidyā. Turya Gāyatrī is ka-e-la-hrīṁ-vākbaveśvarī-vidmahe ha-sa-ka-ha-la-hrīṁkāmeśvarī-ca-dhīmahī । sa-ha-la-hrīṁ-tanna-śaktiḥ-pracodayāt ॥ क-ए-ल-ह्रीं-वाकबवेश्वरर-ववद्महे ह-स-क-ह-ल-ह्रीं-कामेश्वरर-च-ध महर । स-ह-लह्रीं-तन्द्न-शस्कतः-प्रचोदयात्॥ There is a mantra called ātma-aṣṭākṣara mantra. The mantra is om-hrīṁ-hamsaḥ-sohaṁ-svāhā॥ ॐ -ह्रीं-हमसः-सोहीं-स्वाहा ॥ (this mantra is a part of Śrī vidyā cult). She is said to be in the forms of turīya Gāyatrī and ātma-aṣṭākṣara vidyā (aṣṭākṣara means eight alphabets).

584. महाविद्या
Knowing Ātman within, is the process of Self-realization and such knowledge is known as mahā vidyā as per the previous nāma. This nāma says that Ātma-vidyā is the best of all vidyā-s (knowledge). Knowing the Ātman within makes a person not to distinguish between pleasures and pains. Such a person always stays connected with Her and enjoys perpetual bliss, leading to no more births. Pleasure and pain are felt only if one is born. There is another interpretation which says that Vanadurgā vidyā is mahā vidyā. There is a scripture by name Vanadurgā saptasatī consisting of seven hundred verses. Almost every verse consists of mūla mantra. This is extremely powerful and its recitation is sure to drive away all evil forces. . Mūla mantra of Vanadurgā consists of thirty seven bīja-s and is as follows: ॐ uttiṣṭa puruṣi kiṁ svāpiṣi bhayaṁ me samupasthitaṁ yadi śakyamaśakyaṁ vā tanme bhagavati śamaya svāhā || ॐ उस्त्तष्ट परुगवष ककीं स्वावपवष भयीं मे समगपस्स्थतीं यदद शकयमशकयीं वा तन्द्मे भगवनत शमय स्वाहा॥

585. श्रीविद्या
Śrī-vidyā is Pañcadaśī mantra. Viṣṇu purāṇa refers to four types of vidyā-s. They are yajñā-vidyā (deals with karma-s), mahā-vidyā (rituals), guhya-vidyā (secretive worship), ātma-vidyā (knowledge of Self). Pañcadaśī and ṣodaśī mantra-s are considered as most secretive. These mantra-s, if properly initiated and recited as per the prescribed rules, one is bound to attain liberation.

586. कामसेविता
Kāma means the lord of love, Manmatha. She is worshipped by Manmatha. Pañcadaśī mantra was formulated by twelve of Her great devotees and Manmatha is one among them. Names of all the worshippers have been mentioned in nāma 228. Kāmaḥ (कामः) also means Mahā Kāmeśvarā (the highest form of Śiva) who is also Her devotee. Possibly this nāma could also refer to His worship (this is based on the fact that Śiva cannot function without Śaktī). Śiva and Śaktī alternatively assumed the roles of guru and disciple. On many occasions Śiva initiated Śaktī and on certain occasions Śaktī initiated Śiva on various aspects of mantra śāstra-s. In pūrva bhāg of Lalitā triśatī (verse 13), it is said that Lalitā triśatī was told to Hayagrīvā jointly by Kāmeśvarā and Kāmeśvarī. Lalitā triśatī is extremely auspicious and contains three hundred nāma-s. Kāmaḥ signifies Manmatha without bodily form (man means mind and matha means agitating. Therefore Manmahta refers to agitating mind due to desire) There is a story in Liṅga Purāṇa, chapter 101 regarding the bodiless form of Manmatha. Śiva was doing penance forgetting his wife Umā. Brahma and Indra summoned Manamatha and his wife Rati to break Śiva’s penance and to unite Umā with Śiva. Manmatha and his wife Ratī reached the cave where Śiva was doing His penance. Śiva knew the purpose of Manmatha’s visit. The fire blazed from Śiva’s third eye and burnt Manmatha. Ratī who stood by Manmatha’s side inconsolably cried. Śiva took pity on her and gave Manmatha a bodiless form for the purpose of dalliance. This nāma says that body is not necessary for mental worship. Bodily form is required only to perform rituals that are only secondary in nature when compared to mental worship (meditation). This nāma also implies that without understanding the essential natures of Śiva and Śaktī (prakāśa and vimarśa forms), worship may not fructify. For further reading on Manmatha please refer nāma-s 84 and 375. Saundarya Laharī (verse 5) says that Manmatha got his power to induce coquetry by worshipping Śaktī. Pañcadaśī mantra has fifteen bīja-s. If the repetitive bīja-s are removed, the balance would be nine bīja-s. Mahā Lakṣmī (consort of Viṣṇu) taught 108 nāma-s of Lalitāmbikā (nine bīja-s multiplied by numeric twelve making 108) to Manmatha beginning with these nine bīja-s of Pañcadaśī.

587. श्रीषोडशाक्षरीविद्या
ṣoḍaśī mantra is superior to Pañcadaśī. ṣoḍaśan means sixteen and ṣoḍaśaḥ means sixteenth. ṣoḍaśī mantra is derived by adding one more bīja to Pañcadaśī mantra. In fact, ṣoḍaśī mantra consists of twenty eight bīja-s and formed like this. The first Om is excluded for computation, as all the mantras begin with ॐ. 1. Om ॐ 2. śrīṁ - hrīṁ - klīṁ - aiṁ - sauḥ: ि ीं ह्रीं कलरीं ऐीं सौः (5 bīja-s) 3. om - hrīṁ - śrīṁ ॐ ह्रीं ि ीं (3 bīja-s) 4. ka – e - ī – la- hrīṁ क ए ई ल ह्रीं (5 bīja-s) 5. ha - sa – ka – ha - la - hrīṁ ह स क ह ल ह्रीं (6 bīja-s) 6. sa – ka - la - hrīṁ स क ल ह्रीं (4 bīja-s) 7. sauḥ - aiṁ - klīṁ - hrīṁ - śrīṁ सौः ऐीं कलरीं ह्रींि ीं (5 bīja-s) If this mantra is observed, one can find lines 4, 5 and 6 are the Pañcadaśī mantra and each line representing one kūṭa of Pañcadaśī. If lines 2 and 7 are observed, the bīja-s contained in the nd line are placed in the 7th line in reversed order. For example, the last bīja in line two is sauḥ: and this is placed as the first bīja of the th line. This mantra is known as ṣoḍaśī because of sixteen bīja-s, each kalā (kalā means a part) representing a kalā of moon. This is arrived at by adding Lakṣmī bīja śrīṁ (ि ीं) at the end of Pañcadaśī mantra. These sixteen bīja-s are arrived at by considering each kūṭa of Pañcadaśī mantra as one bīja. This way, lines 4, 5 and 6 are considered as one bīja each, thus forming three bīja-s. The sixteen bīja-s are arrived by adding 5+3+1+1+1+5 (from line 2 to 7). There are two ॐ in this mantra. The first ॐ is not considered for calculation. The second ॐ in line 3 is replaced by ātma bīja of the practitioner and this is decided by one’s guru. Such a decision can be made by a guru if he is conversant with mantra-s and bīja-s. A wrong bīja is capable of destroying the practitioner. ṣoḍaśī mantra is meant exclusively for liberation and those who seek liberation alone should be initiated in this mantra. ṣoḍaśī mantra is the ultimate of all mantra-s and there is no other mantra superior to this. It is said that ṣoḍaśī mantra yields fruits after reciting 900,000 times. Those who are initiated into this mantra are not supposed to prostrate before anyone except his guru. Śaktī is worshipped in ten different forms and this is known as daśa mahā vidyā and ṣoḍaśī is one among them. ṣoḍaśī vidyā has too many prescribed rituals. {Further reading on bīja sauḥ सौः This bīja sauḥ सौः is known as prāsāda (ŚIva sūtra II.1). It contains within itself the entire panorama of manifestation. This bīja represents all the thrity six tattva-s. This bīja is also known as hṛdaya bīja, the heart of Śiva. It is also said that, whoever masters this bīja will be identified with Supreme I consciousness.}

588. त्रिकूटा
She is in the form of triads. In spirituality there are a number of triads. OM consists of three letters a + u + m. In Gāyatrī mantra three worlds are mentioned bhūr, bhuva and suvaḥ. Gods of creation, sustenance and death are known as Brahma, Viṣṇu and Rudra. Three stages of consciousness awake, dream and deep sleep. Three guṇa-s sattva, rajas and tamas. Three stages of time past, present and future. Pañcadaśī mantra consists of three kūṭa-s agni, surya and candra. Icchā śakti, jñāna śakti and kriyā śakti-s. Triads are associated only with Her. In this nāma She is said to be the Lord of creation, sustenance and dissolution. This nāma endorses nāma 249 pañcapretāsanāsīnā. A reference can also be made to nāma 626.

589. कामकोटिका
The Brahman has two forms. One is Śiva (nirguṇa Brahman or Brahman without attributes and another is Śaktī (saguṇa Brahman or Brahman with attributes). The Śivaśaktī aikya form is known as Brahman. Śiva-Śaktī aikya happens in two forms. One is Śaktī sitting on the lap of Śiva and another is Ardhanārīśvara form, where one vertical form is Śiva and another is Śaktī. This is referred to in this nāma. Kāma refers to Śiva and koṭi means vertical. Lalitā Triśatī nāma 259 is kāmakoṭi nilayā which conveys the same meaning.

590. कटाक्षकिङ्करीभुतकमलाकोटिसेविता
By Her mere glance She is attended by millions of Lakṣmī-s, the Goddess of wealth. If Lakṣmī glances at a person his richness grows. This nāma says that Lalitāmbikā is attended to by countless number of Lakṣmī-s, signifying Her incomprehensible nature of wealth and prosperity.

591. शिरःस्थिता
She is in the head. Head means the sahasrāra at the top of the head. Apart from Śiva and Śaktī, one’s Guru is also worshipped in sahasrāra. This nāma could also mean that She is the supreme Guru who is worthy of worship in sahasrāra. Guru is the one who not only initiates into mantra-s but also imparts knowledge about the Brahman. A learned guru always makes his disciple to progress in both. Based upon disciple’s progress, guru advises his disciple to gradually move away from rituals to internal exploration, paving way for the ultimate Selfrealization. No progress in Self- realization can be achieved if one continues to be associated with ritualistic worship alone. Only those gurus who are capable of imparting such supreme knowledge about the Brahman are to be worshipped in sahasrāra, as sahasrāra is the sanctum sanctorum of human body.

592. चन्द्रनिभा
The shine of the moon is visualized just below sahasrāra. The visibility of moon is a strong indication to know the progress achieved in kuṇḍalinī meditation. The third kūṭa of Pañcadaśī mantra is candra kūṭa. She is like this moon. A reference can also be made to nāma 240.

593. भालस्था
She is in the form of the bindu of bīja hrīṁ in ājñā cakra. Hrīṁ bīja is formed out of twelve components, out of which three are letters and the rest are subtle modifications of sound. The bindu of bīja hrīṁ is placed above the alphabet ī (ई). In Śrī Cakra, Śiva is in the form of bindu and Śaktī is in the form of innermost triangle. This nāma says that She resides in ājñā cakra in the forehead.

594. इन्द्रधनुःप्रभा
Indra dhanu in literal sense is Indra’s bow. But, in this context it indicates rainbow. In fact, this nāma is an extension of the previous nāma. There is a rainbow just above the bindu of hrīṁ (ह्रीँ) that has been referred in the previous nāma. The bindu itself shines. Apart from bindu, this rainbow like structure that is quarter of the size of the bindu also shines. The bindu and rainbow like formation which is also known as ardhacandra (half the shape of the moon thereby forming a rainbow), are visualised while worshipping kāmakalā form of Lalitāmbikā. Reference to rainbow is used as it consists of seven colours (VIBGYOR) that get exploded at sahasrara. These colours originate here. Varivasyā-rahasya (I.22) says, “The bindu, in circular form, shines forth like a lamp with its seat in the middle of the forehead.”

595. हृदयस्था
She resides in the heart. Kaṭha Upaniṣad (II.2.12) says ‘residing in heart’. The same Upaniṣad says again in (II.1.12) says ‘Brahman resides in the centre of the body in the size of a thumb.’ This nāma reaffirms Her stature as the Brahman. This nāma could mean that she is to be meditated in heart cakra. One of the ancient scriptures says that one who knows the heart of Brahman enjoys eternal happiness. The heart of the Brahman is the store house of universal love.

596. रविप्रख्या
The second kūṭa of Pañcadaśī mantra is situated in anāhata cakra. This is called sūrya kūṭa. This nāma says that She shines like the sun, residing in one’s heart. She shines in every kūṭa, but the nature of illumination differs.

597. त्रिकोणान्तरदीपिका
She shines like a flame in the triangle of mūlādhāra cakra. The first kūṭa of Pañcadaśī mantra, the agni kūṭa is mentioned here. {Further reading on nāma 591 to 597: In these nāma-s the subtle nature of the three kūṭa-s of Pañcadaśī mantra, are explained. The first kūṭa is visualised in the centre of mūlādhāra cakra as a flame of fire. The second kūṭa is visualised in the form of a rainbow in anāhata cakra. The third kūṭa is visualised at a place just below the sahasrāra. The Pañcadaśī mantra sprouts as the first kūṭa in the mūlādhāra cakra develops further by adding the second kūṭa in the anāhata cakra and blossoms fully just below sahasrāra, where the third kūṭa is added. This is beautifully explained in Mūka-Pañcaśatī (I.50) which says “In the centre of the heart, in the middle of the forehead and in the centre of the head, She shines like sun, Indra’s dhanu and moon.” (mūka means dumb}.

598. दाक्षायणी
She was born to Dakṣa and got married to Śiva. This nāma talks about Her lineage. Certain fire rituals are performed on full moon and new moon days continuously. These are known as darśa-pūrṇa-māsa yajña and the oblations offered during these rituals are known as Dākṣāyana yajña. These yajnas are considered as powerful and She is said to be in the form of those yajña-s. Dakṣa also means strength of will, energy and disposition. It also refers to the strengthening intellectual faculties. It is also said that Dakṣa has twenty seven daughters who became the wives of Moon and they form the asterisms. He is also identified with Prajā-pati and known as Dakṣa Prajā-pati. Further reading on darśa-pūrṇa-māsa yajna: Darśapūrṇamāsa is one of the śrauta rituals. There are three main categories. The first is called iṣṭi or haviryajñā in which the oblations are of rice or barley. The second is animal sacrifice and the third is soma ritual. In the first category there are five types of rituals and they are agnyādheya, punarādheya, agnihotra, darśapūrṇamāsa and cāturmāsya. Darśapūrṇamāsa is full and new moon ceremonies incorporate recitations from two Veda-s, Rig and Yajur and require the services of four priests. The full and new moon sacrifice (darśapūrṇamāsa) is the paradigm of all the iṣṭi-s.}

599. दैत्यहन्त्री
Daitya means evil and represented as demons in epics. She is the slayer of all evil acts (demonic qualities). Reference can be made to nāma 318.

600. दक्षयज्ञविनाशिनी
She destroyed the sacrificial rites of two Dakṣa-s. There existed two Dakṣa-s. One is known as Dakṣa Prajā-pati, a superhuman character and another is the human incarnation of the former. They did not respect Śiva. In all the yajña-s, a portion of the oblations are offered to all gods and goddesses. Due to their egoistic nature they did not give such oblations to Śiva. Śiva got wild and their yajña-s were destroyed by Śiva’s army. She is said to be the cause behind such destruction. This nāma signifies this cause. Two Dakṣa-s existed at different times. Śiva cursed superhuman Dakṣa to be born as a human.

601. दरान्दोलितदीर्घाक्षी
She has shapely eyes that almost touch Her ears. Her eyes rotate all-round to dispel the fear of Her devotees. In Mūka Pañcaśatī (मूक पञ्चशत ) there are 101 verses praising Her eyes. In Saundarya Laharī also there are verses praising Her eyes. Her eyes express Her compassion and concern for Her devotees and that is why She is glancing all round to shower Her grace on those who surrender to Her. Her compassion is predominant in Her capacity as the Universal Mother or Mā. When someone calls Her as Mā Her eyes move towards the direction of the sound. This is the reason for frequent rotation of Her eyes on all directions.

602. दरहासोज्ज्वलन्मुखी
This nāma describes Her smile. This smile attracts everyone to become Her devotee. One’s compassion and mercy are expressed through eyes and smile.

603. गुरुमूर्तिः
She is in the form of Guru. In Śrī vidyā cult, Guru, mantra and the deity should not be differentiated. Varivasyā-rahasya (which explains Pañcadaśī mantra in detail) verse 102 says, ‘The identity of the Mother, the Vidyā, the Cakra (Śrī Cakra), the Guru and the disciple himself should be practiced.’ The earlier verse (101) says that ‘one’s Guru is identical with Devatā, Vidyā and Śrī Cakra....with the grace of Guru, the practitioner attains identity therewith.’ Guru means dispeller of darkness. Guru also means a person who possesses the Supreme knowledge about the Brahman. In this context, She is said to be the Supreme Guru. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma 209 addresses Viṣṇu as Guru.

604. गुणनिधिः
She is the storehouse of guṇa-s. Guṇa-s are of three types: sattvic, rajas and tamas. When these guṇa-s or qualities vary in proportions, countless guṇa-s arise. All the combinations of guṇa-s arise from Her. Sāṁkhya sūtra (I.128) says, “Through the properties of lightness, etc. The constituents agree with, and differ from each other.” Guṇa-s also mean conglomeration of nine qualities. Śiva, is said to possess nine qualities. These nine qualities are: 1. time (kalā), 2. lineage (kulā), 3. names (nāma), 4. Knowledge (jñāna), 5. consciousness or mind (cit), 6. nāda (subtle sounds arising within the body while practicing prāṇāyāma), 7. bindu (consisting of sixteen kalā-s that include prāṇa, sincerity, five elements, indriya-s - karmendriya-s and jñānendriya-s, mind, food, vitality, penance, mantra-s, karma-s, worlds and names. 8. kalpa and 9. jīva. These nine qualities are different from their common usage. There is a story associated with this nāma. Guṇa also means rope. During great annihilation, Viṣṇu attained the form of a fish (matsya avatār), bundled the entire seeds of jīva-s, placed them in a boat and pulled them with a rope that was tied to the nose of the fish. Devi took the form of the rope making the rope strong. Praśna Upaniṣad, chapter (VI.2) says, “saḥ puruṣo yasminnetāḥ ṣoḍaśakalāḥ prabhavantīti”, which means ‘sixteen parts emerge from this Self.’ ṣoḍaśakalāḥ means sixteen parts. These parts are explained in (VI.4). “That Puruṣa (nirguṇa Brahman) created Hiraṇyagarbha (prāṇātmā); from Hiraṇyagarbha came faith; from faith came space; from space, air; from air, fire; from fire, water; from water earth; from earth, organs. Next He created mind and then food; from food, virility, austerities, the Veda-s, the sacrifices, heaven, other worlds and then various designations.”

605. गोमाता
She is the Mother of all cows. Cows are considered sacred. This nāma also could mean the holy cow kāmadhenu capable of yielding any quantity of food at anytime. The word go (गो) is frequently used in Veda-s, meaning knowledge while practicing inner yajñā and in outer yajñā it means four legged animals. The word gauḥ also means speech, rays, heaven, etc indicating that they have originated from Her.

606. गुहजन्मभूः
Guha means hide, conceal or secret. Janma-bhūḥ means the birth place. A soul is born, covered or concealed by avidyā or ignorance. These souls are born from Her, the Brahman. This is explained in Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (II.i.20) which says “from a fire tiny sparks fly in all directions, so from this Self emanate ........all beings.” Souls are the tiny sparks and the Self is the Brahman, our own Lalitāmbikā. This particular angle of creation is elaborated in almost all the Upaniṣad-s. If this nāma is viewed through the interpretation of the first nāma Śrī Mātā, the universal mother giving birth to all beings perfectly fits into the teachings of the Upaniṣad-s. Guha also means Kārttikeya (He is also known as Subrahmaṇya and Skanda). This nāma also could mean that She had given birth to Kārttikeya. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (X.24), “senānīnāmahaṁ skandaḥ”, which means “among generals, I am Skanda.”

607. देवेशी
She is the Īśvarī for Deva-s (gods), which means that She is the Supreme among all gods and goddesses. She is the source for all divinities.

608. दण्डनीतिस्था
Daṇḍa-nīti means encumbering those who resort to evil ways and making them to pursue the path of goodness. She punishes those ignorant men who are unwilling to pursue the virtuous path. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (X.38) ‘I am the rod of punishment’. According to The Bible ‘rod’ means the law of karma. The Bible says “I will fear no evil: thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me” (Old Testament. Psalms 23:4). God administers the universe through the law of karma and those who follow the virtuous path need not worry about the divine punishment. “Their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon them” (The Bible. OT. Job 21:9) and “how oft cometh their destruction upon them! God distributeth sorrows in his anger” (Job 21:17). This is the reason for carrying a rod when a Judge enters a court hall. This is practiced by several parliaments when a presiding officer enters the parliament. They are the sustainers of justice. In the same way She administers the universe with Her justness (law of karma).

609. दहराकाशरूपिणी
In the hearts of all beings is Her subtle form. Better interpretations are available in various scriptures. Kaṭha Upaniṣad ((I.iii.1) mentions this place as “In this superior space of the heart, present in the cave of the intellect”. It further says (II.i.12), “Of the size of a thumb, the Brahman resides in the centre of the body”. Chāndogya Upaniṣad says “This body is the city of the Brahman. Within it is an abode in the shape of a lotus (meaning heart) and within that there is a small space (Please note the word. It is ‘space’ and not ‘place’. Space is infinite and place is definite). One must search within this space and earnestly desire to know what is there? (Self-realization)” Brahma sūtra (I.iii.14) says “dahara uttarebhyaḥ दहर उत्तरेभयः” referring to the small space in the heart. It proceeds to say, “That is which is inside, that is sought for, that is surely to be inquired into”, indicating the process of Self-realisation. This nāma says that She is in That form (the Brahman), that can only be realized. This nāma also reiterates Her status as the Brahman.

610. प्रतिपन्मुख्यराकान्ततिथिमण्डलपूजिता
Pratipad means the first lunar day and rākā means the full moon. In Śrī Cakra, She is surrounded by fifteen tithi nitya devi-s, five on each side of the inner most triangle. The bindu, the central point of Śrī Cakra, where Śaktī is sitting on the lap of Śiva is covered by this inner most triangle. Each of the lunar day is represented by one tithi nitya devi. In Śrī vidyā cult, all these deities are worshipped during ritual worship of Śrī Cakra. Lalitāmbikā is worshipped as mahā-nitya. This interpretation is as per tantra śāstrā-s. Tithi maṇḍala is also referred to in Veda-s, which mentions fifteen names representing fifteen lunar days or tithi-s of waxing moon. In addition to the names of the fifteen deities, Veda-s also refer to one more deity by name Sadā (meaning perpetually) which is known as the 16th kalā of moon. Moon has sixteen kalā-s. Each kalā is represented by a goddess beginning with Amṛtā and ending with Pūrṇāmṛtā and their names are prefixed with each vowel (there are sixteen vowels in Sanskrit). A reference can be made to nāma 391.

611. कलात्मिका
She is in the form of kalā-s. Kalā means digit or minute parts of an entity. The moon has sixteen such kalā-s, the sun has twelve kalā-s and agni (fire) has ten kalā-s. When it is said that the moon has sixteen kalā-s, it means moon is made up of sixteen parts. During waning period of moon one kalā is reduced on each day leading to no moon (new moon day or amāvāsya) on the 15th day. Similarly one kalā is added each day during waxing period of moon leading to the full moon comprising of all the fifteen kalā-s. The 16th kalā of the moon is Lalitāmbikā who is present in the moon without waxing and waning. This is yet another example to confirm that the Brahman is without any modification. This nāma says that She is present even in the subtlest part of an object confirming the omnipresent nature of the Brahman. Examples of the moon, sun and fire are taken because of their illuminating nature. They are not self-illuminating in nature but simply reflect the illumination of the Brahman. There are four stages of consciousness. They are awake, dream, deep sleep and turya stages. Each of these stages has four kalā-s making a total of sixteen kalā-s. The awake stage is said to be in the form Lalitāmbikā. The four kalā-s of awake stages are rising, waking, consciousness and mental action. In nāma 236, 64 kalā-s s have been referred. In that context, kalā-s means art. There are many such kalā-s referred to in the scriptures.

612. कलानाथा
She is ruler of kalā-s discussed above. All subtle matters that make a gross matter are administered by Her. Hence, She is known as the ruler of kalā-s. The chief of kalā-s of the moon is known as Kalānātha, which also means the lord of digits of the moon. The disc of the moon is compared to Śrī Cakra. Since She resides in Śrī Cakra, She is also known as Kalānāthā.

613. काव्यालापविनोदिनी
Kāvyā-s mean the great epics. Epics have eighteen types of qualities. The Rāmāyaṇa of the great sage Vālmīki has all the eighteen qualities and is said to be the first among the epics. She is delighted when She listens to such great epics that fulfil all the eighteen qualities. The eighteen qualities are serenity, regularity, absence of vanity, sincerity, simplicity, veracity, equanimity, fixity, non-irritability, adaptability, humility, tenacity, integrity, nobility, magnanimity, charity, generosity and purity. It is said that by properly worshipping Her, one attains poetization capabilities. The two known examples are in the form of poet Kālidāsa (author of Śakuntalā, Mālavikāgnimitra, Megha-dūta, and Raghu-vaṃśa and dumb turned poet Mūka kavi (mūk means dumb and kavi means poet). Saundarya Laharī (verse 17) conveys the same meaning. It says when She is contemplated along with eight Vāc Devi-s, (Bhū prastāra – refer nāma 577) the authors of this Sahasranāma, one gets poetic capabilities. Nāma 798 says that She is in the form of those great poetic epics. Sacāmara-ramā-vāṇī-savyadakṣiṇa-sevitā सचामर-रमा-वाण -

614. सचामररमावाणीसव्यदक्षिणसेविता
Goddess Lakṣmī (Ramā) and Goddess Sarasvatī (Vāṇī) stand by Her side and fan Her. This nāma means that those who contemplate Her get wealth and intelligence without even asking for them. This concept is discussed in Saundarya Laharī verse 99, Lalitā triśatī nāma-s 63 and 194.

615. आदिशक्तिः
She is the primordial energy of creation. Śiva has no creator. Śiva’s only creation is Śaktī who in turn created the universe. Hence She is called as Ādi (first) Śaktī (energy). In fact, Śaktī is the creative pulsation of Śiva. It is only because of Śaktī, empiric individual realises his essential divine nature. {Further reading: Śaktī asks many questions to Śiva. The questions of Śaktī and answers of Śiva are in the form of various tantra śāstras. There are three positions from which Śaktī seeks answers from Śiva. The first position is Śaktī sitting by the side of Śiva. The questions asked from this position are only preliminaries. The next position is Śaktī sitting on the lap of Śiva. Questions asked from this position are towards attaining Śiva. When She gets clarifications from Śiva and through the knowledge gained during the question answer sessions, She merges with Śiva and becomes a part of Śiva – the Ardhanārīśvara form. This form leads to Liṅga form, the Ultimate Reality. This is a typical example of realisation. When one is at the beginning stage of spirituality there is a gap between the Brahman and the seeker. When he acquires knowledge of advaita, he moves closer to Him. When He realizes the Brahman, he merges with Him and his consciousness loses duality. Finally he transforms into “I am That”.}

616. अमेया
She is immeasurable. Mortals are measureable and eternal is not measureable. Kaṭha Upaniṣad explains this phenomenon. It says “smaller than the smallest and bigger than the biggest” (I.ii.20). This is a popular verse among all the Upaniṣad. The original Sanskrit version goes like this “aṇoraṇīyānmahato mahīyānātmā......” This is the unique nature of the Brahman.

617. आत्मा
Like Self and self ātma is also known by Ātma and ātma. self or ātma indicates the soul and Self or Ātma indicates the Brahman. When one realizes self as the Self, it is known as Self-realization. This nāma means soul (ātma as the next nāma makes a reference to the Brahman. ātma is also known as jīva. When jīva is covered by body, it is known as jīvan. Soul is also known as puruṣa. Soul worships Ātma by means of meditation. The soul within a shape and form is known as yajamāna or the master. The object of meditation is Ātma and meditation is a process by which ātma seeks the Ātma by modification of his mind. The fact remains that Ātma remains in ātma right from the primeval stage, but due to illusion and ignorance, It is not realised. The fruit of mediation is the bliss leading to the merger of ātma with Ātma. Ātma means Śiva and ātma refers to Śaktī and the merger between the two is known as Śiva- Śaktī aikya. (aikya – union. Refer nāma 999). This process happens at sahasrāra.

618. परमा
The previous nāma addresses Her as ātma and this nāma addresses Her as Ātma also known as the Brahman. From these two nāma-s one can understand that She is both saguṇa Brahman (Brahman with attributes) and nirguṇa Brahman (Brahman without attributes), confirming Her Superior status. Para + asya + ma make paramā. Para means Universal soul or the Brahman; asya means of this; ma means me. Therefore paramā means ‘I am this Universal soul”, the concept of Self-realisation. This can also be interpreted as parasya + ma meaning that She is the wife of Śiva (paras memans beyond). Being the wife of Śiva, She helps spiritual seekers in realising Śiva. Liṅga Purāṇa (Chapter 86. Verses 97 – 99) says “Ātman is neither having intellectual awareness within nor having intellectual awareness without, nor is He in both ways. He is neither perfect knowledge nor wise nor having ignorance. Brahman is neither the one that is known, nor the one to be known. In fact He is extinction, devoid of ailments, immortal, imperishable, Parama-Ātman, (Parama means most excellent) Brahman, parātpara (greater than the greatest), devoid of doubtful alternatives, devoid of fallacious appearances, knowledge. All these are synonyms.” She is in this form. Para-Brahman (the Supreme Brahman, Śiva and Śaktī combine) has four forms. They are the puruṣa (soul), un-manifested, manifested and time. She has transcended all these four forms to remain as the Supreme.

619. पावनाकृतिः
She is the embodiment of purity. It also means that She performs all auspicious acts such as creation, sustenance and liberation. She is the cause for Self-realization as She alone can lead to Śiva. A soul gets purified through penance and knowledge. Realising the Brahman is possible, only by acquiring the highest form of intellect. This purification process can happen only with Her grace. It is also said that one gets purified by simply cogitating Her. Perpetual cerebration about Her is the highest of all spiritual acts. All other acts such as meditation and rituals are considered inferior and ineffective. These processes are merely tools to access the ceaseless cognitive process which ultimately leads to Divine commune, bliss and liberation. Reference can also be made to nāma 542.

620. अनेककोटिब्रह्माण्डजननी
She has given birth to billions of worlds is the literal meaning. This is based on Her attributes of causing creation, sustenance and death. The universe is said to contain millions of planets like earth with their own galaxies. Man has four predominant level of consciousness – sleep, dream, deep sleep and turya stages. These four stages of consciousness are related to souls or microcosms. In the same way, the Brahman or the macrocosm has four different stages. They are avyakta, Īśvara, hiraṇyagarbha and virāt. Avyakta is the state of prakṛti in its un-manifested form, with the three guṇa-s in equal proportions. Avyakta is the first stage of the Brahman that cannot be explained, as this is the purest form of the Brahman, without parentage. This stage is also known as turya or the fourth state of consciousness. It is the non-dualistic state, where the Brahman without a second is realized. It is highly subtle in nature endowed with tranquillity and bliss (cloud nine stage). The second stage is Īśvara. The concept of God begins here. This stage is the cause of creation, sustenance and death and the stage of ‘all-knowing’. Māyā which is known as illusion is associated with this stage. This forms the casual body or kāraṇa śarīra. The third stage is hiraṇyagarbha. This is the binding factor of the universe. It holds all the creations together. This forms the subtle body or liṅga śarīra or sūkṣma śarīra. The fourth stage is virāṭ. This is also known as vaiśvānara. This is where manifestation of forms takes place and the gross form of the world is realized and is seen with biological eyes. But this is not everything. It is only a miniscule of the Brahman. Gross forms become perceivable when vaiśvānara or virāṭ gets associated with māyā. This forms the gross body or sthūla śarīra. When soul or puruṣa gets associated with prakṛti, the birth of a living being happens. When virāṭ gets associated with māyā, the birth of the universe happens. The former is microcosm and the latter is macrocosm. All these four stages are referred in this Sahasranāma. Avyakta in nāma 398, Īśvara (Īśvarī) in nāma 271, hiraṇyagarbha (svarṇa-garbha) in nāma 638 and virāṭ (virāṭ-rūpa) in nāma 778. This nāma refers to the combination of these four stages. Aitareya Upaniṣad opens by saying “In the beginning this was but the absolute Self alone. There was nothing else whatsoever that winked. It thought ‘let Me create the worlds’”. This talks about the Will of the Brahman to create and the process of creation.

621. दिव्यविग्रहा
She has a divinely shaped body the beauty of which is possible only for the Divine. This nāma has another interpretation. Divya also means divine world and vigrahā means war. In Śrī Devi Māhātmyam, it is said that She had climbed to ākāś without support and fought the battle against the demon Śuṁbha.

622. क्लीङ्कारी
She is in the form of kāma bīja klīṁ (कलरीं). It is also known as Manmatha (Kāmadeva) bīja, the bīja of the love god. Ka (क) refers to Kāmadeva, la (ल) refers to Lord Indra, ī (ई) refers to contentment and bindu is the cause of pleasure or pain depending upon one’s karmic account. This interpretation is given by Śiva to Śaktī out of His love for Her. Klīṁ bīja is used to please the Goddess of wealth Lakṣmī. Klīṁkāra is Śiva and his wife is Klīṁkārī and this way Ka means Śiva and la means Śaktī and īṁ (ईं) is kāmakalā (nāma 322). Therefore klīṁ also means Śiva-Śaktī union.

623. केवला
She is The Absolute. Absolute because, She is devoid of qualities and modifications, the unique feature of the nirguṇa Brahman. Śiva sūtra (III.34) explains thus “Completely free from the influence of pleasure and pain, he is rather alone – fully established in his real Self as sheer consciousness.” This sūtra uses a word kevali meaning ‘one whose knowership consists in sheer consciousness.’ The bīja klīṁ discussed in the previous nāma is made up of ka + la + īṁ. Kevalā in this nāma means īṁ, the kāmakalā. When the other two bīja-s are removed from klīṁ, the bīja that remains is kāmakalā that is capable of giving liberation. The word puruṣārtha means the end of human life. puruṣārtha consists of dharma (righteousness), artha (wealth), kāma (desires) and mokṣa (the final liberation). Kāmakalā, which forms part of klīṁ is capable of liberating a soul. Kāma bīja is klīṁ and Kāmakalā is īṁ. Kāmakalā forms part of kāma bīja. Both these bīja-s are auspicious and powerful.

624. गुह्या
She is secretive both in form and in nature. It is repeatedly said that Her worship should be of secretive in nature. She cannot be worshipped in the presence of those who do not have fundamental knowledge about Her. Navāvaraṇa pūja should not be performed in the presence of those who are not initiated into Her mantra-s. The secrecy in Her worship is advocated because She provides certain superhuman powers to the worshipper, provided the ritual is performed without any deviations. But Self-realisation happens beyond all religious rites and rituals (Katha Upaniṣad I.ii.14) This nāma also confirms Her status as the Supreme, as the Supreme resides in a secretive cave in the heart. Katha Upaniṣad (II.1.12) says ‘In the size of the thumb the Brahman rests in the body’. This resting place of the Brahman appears like a lotus (the biological heart) and inside this lotus there is a small empty space. This empty space is filled by the Brahman in the form of Self illuminating smoke. The Upaniṣad proceeds to say “She manifests Herself as prāṇa (cosmic energy). She is also the five elements. She is present in the heart of every being (II.i.7)”. Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II.1) also says “It is in the space within the heart which is like a cave”. It continues to say “He who realizes the Self there not only realizes the all-knowing Brahman, but also attains everything he wants.” From the Supreme Self comes space and from space the five elements come into existence. This cave in the heart is known as parame vyoman.

625. कैवल्यपददायिनी
Kaivalya is the final stage of life of a living being. Nobody is there with that being during that time. He is all alone without any help around and he has to achieve on his own. This is the final stage of one’s evolution. The soul is about to leave its present body and getting ready to merge with the Brahman. Kaivalya is liberation or salvation and hence it is called the final stage. This final stage can be reached in two ways. One is the mundane stage associated with desires and attachments where soul gets ready for rebirth. The other stage is the stage of samādi, where the soul gets ready for its union with the Brahman not to be born again. This is kaivalya. Lalitāmbikā is the giver of this stage. Pada means four types of consciousness. They are sālokya, sarūpa, samībha and sāyujya. Beyond this is kaivalya. Sālokya is the stage where one performs ritual worship, worshipping idols or portraits of gods. In sarūpa he leaves idol worship and does not differentiate himself from god. In samībha he goes near the god and in sāyujya stage he merges with god. These are the stages of one’s consciousness that finally lead to kaivalya. One has to progress from one stage to another and this progression happens depending upon the level of spirituality. By being spiritual does not mean one has to be religious. Spirituality transcends religious affinities, though religion forms the foundation of spirituality. To attain kaivalya stage one has to progress from ritual worship to mental worship (meditation). By making sufficient progress in meditation, one has to search for the Brahman within. Once the Brahman is located and realized within, the practitioner moves to the stage of kaivalya, by detaching himself from worldly affinities by staying connected with his Creator. His soul is now under preparation to merge with Him, for final liberation. Finally, he gets liberated with no further transmigration for that soul.

626. त्रिपुरा
There is an ancient scripture titled Tripura rahasya in the form of dialogue between sage Bhārgava and sage Dattatreya. The original text consists of three parts – The glory of Devi, Her rituals and knowledge about Her. This nāma could also mean that She is in the form of all triads. For example, She is in the form of Brahma, Viṣṇu and Rudra; Icchā, jñāna and kriyā śakti-s; the three kūṭa-s of Pañcadaśī; creation, sustenance and destruction; the three nādi-s, iḍā, piṅgala and suṣumna; three worlds, bhūr, bhuva, suvaḥ; three guṇa-s sattvic, rajasic and tamsic. She is in the form of all such triads and once these triads are transcended, the Brahman is attained. Brahman is pure consciousness and can be visualized in three ways. The first one is paramātṛ-caitanya (consciousness limited by intellect). The second one is pramāṇa-caitanya (consciousness limited by knowledge). The third one is jīva-caitanya (consciousness limited by individual soul). These three types of consciousness are also known as triad.

627. त्रिजगद्वन्द्या
She is worshipped in all the three worlds viz. bhūr, bhuvar, suvar. The three worlds are represented by three vyāhṛti-s of Gāyatrī mantra. These three worlds are nothing but the three stages of consciousness. The lowest level of consciousness is materialistic in nature and the highest-level consciousness is pure in nature. The purest form of consciousness is the Brahman.

628. त्रिमूर्तिः
Trimurti-s are Brahma, Viṣṇu and Rudra. She is the combined form of these three Gods. There is a story associated with this nāma. Brahma, Viṣṇu and Śiva looked at each other and in the process there appeared a young girl. On seeing the girl, these Lords asked her who she is. She replied saying that She is the Śaktī, the combined form of all the three of them. They named the girl as Tripura. Tripura form of Devi was born out of subtle looks of Gods of creation, sustenance and dissolution. She is made of three colours, white, black and red. White colour is Brahma. He is sattvic in nature and hence described as white. Next is black representing Viṣṇu’s rajo guṇa. The third colour is red, representing the red colour of Rudra, a form of Śiva, tamo guṇa. However, the guṇa-s of Brahma, Viṣṇu and Śiva are interpreted differently. It is said that the Brahman has divided into three, Brahma, Viṣṇu and Rudra. The same three combined to form Śaktī. She is One into many and many into One. That one is the Brahman. Brahman is the cause and Śaktī is the effect. For every cause there has to be effect/s. This nāma says that She is in the form of the three guṇa-s and thus represents the three aspects of the Brahman - creation, sustenance and dissolution. Please refer nāma-s 763 and 984.

629. त्रिदशेश्वरी
She is Īśvarī to all gods and goddesses. She is the Īśvarī of tri-daśas. In human, there are four stages – child, youth, middle age and old age. However, gods have only one stage of eternal youthfulness. . Hence gods and goddesses are known as tri-daśa. She is the chief of all tri-daśa-s (gods and goddesses). Tri means three and daśa means ten. 3 x 10 gives numeric 30. Another three is to be added to this making it as 33. Twelve Ādityas, eight Vasu-s, eleven Rudra-s, and two Aśvin-s, thus making thirty three. She is the chief of all these thirty three gods. Each of these thirty three gods has 10,000,000 (ten million or one crore) assistants and they can be explained as demigods and demigoddesses. This explains 33 crore gods (330 million). She is also the Īśvarī for three stages of human consciousness – sleep, dream and deep sleep stages.

630. त्र्यक्षरि
She is in the form three bīja-s. For example, Bālā mantra has three bīja-s – aiṁ - klīṁ- sauḥ (ऐीं- कलरीं- सौः). In ṣodaśī mantra, the three kūṭa-s of Pañcadaśī are treated as three bīja-s. Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (V.iii.1) says that hṛdaya (हृदय) has three syllables (hṛ + da+ ya). In the same Upaniṣad it is also said (V.v.1) that satya (सत्य) has three syllables (sa + t + ya). Both heart and truth means the Brahman. All those that have three syllables lead to Her. For example, Brahman is said to be residing in the heart. satyaṁ jñānamanantaṁ is the Brahman.

631. दिव्यगन्धाढ्या
She is endowed with divine fragrance. This fragrance is possible from three sources. Her form itself is full of fragrance. She is surrounded by demigods and goddesses who have natural fragrance. Their natural fragrance in combination with Her divine fragrance diffuses across the worlds. Men worship Her with sandal and other fragrant materials. The fragrance thus offered by Her devotees imbues to all the worlds. When someone mediates on Her with great devotion, at the peak of meditation a pleasant fragrance emanates from him, making his surrounding fragrant. For this, one needs to transcend his cogitated level. Patañjali yoga sūtra talks about transcending sensory perceptions (III.42). Every sensory perception has its own process and limitations. If one is able to transcend that limit that particular sensory perception, linked with mind and consciousness, takes him beyond his perceptions.

632. सिन्दूरतिलकाञ्चिता
She is adorned with vermillion mark on Her forehead. This nāma also means that She is surrounded by she elephants. Vermillion mark is a sign of auspiciousness.

633. उमा
Her name is Umā. She is the wife of Maheśvara and is known as Umā Maheśvara. She was born to Himavān, the king of mountains and his wife Mena. She started Her penance at the age of five to attain Maheśvara (Śiva) as Her husband. Śiva sūtra (I.13) says Icchā śaktir umā kumārī. Here Umā means splendour of Śiva. One’s will power in constant commune with Śiva is also known as Umā. The ever present “I” consciousness of Śiva which is free in knowing and doing all acts is known as Umā. Umā is the combination of three letters of OM – U + M + A, the praṇava. U refers to creation, M refers to destruction and A refers to sustenance. Therefore Umā also means the three acts of the Brahman. Liṅga Purāṇa (133.44) says ‘the goddess is the mother of worlds’. Liṅga Purāṇa further says “The goddess born of Rudra’s body rebuked Dakṣa and was born as Umā, the daughter of Himavān. She is bowed to, by all the worlds. Let her try to captivate the mind of Rudra by means of her beauty. Through their union Lord Skanda will be born.” The anāhata sound of heart cakra is also known as Umā. Umā is also known as Śaktī praṇava (klīṁ is also known as Śaktī praṇava). Six year old girl is known as Umā. Kena Upaniṣad (III.12) says, bahuśobhamānām umāṁ haimavatīṁ which means a woman wearing many ornaments. She is the combination of self-knowledge, splendour and grandeur.

634. शैलेन्द्रतनया
Daughter of king of mountains, Himavān. Mountain is immovable. She is pure caitanya. Caitanya means pure consciousness. Pure consciousness arises out of pure knowledge. This is called the zfourth state or turya state. This nāma indirectly says that even in immovable, the Brahman dwells. Tanaya means offspring.

635. गौरी
She is in golden colour, a combination of white and yellow. It is said that when She was born, Her complexion looked like combined colour of conch, jasmine flower and moon. Not only they are whitish yellow in colour, but also they are considered as highly auspicious objects. Varuṇa’s (god of waters) wife is also known as Gaurī. A ten year old girl is known as Gaurī.

636. गन्धर्वसेविता
Liṅga Purāṇa refers to twelve excellent gandharva-s. They are set to reside in sky, or the region of the air and the heavenly waters. They are celestial singers. Their names are 1. Tumburu, 2. Nārada, 3. Hāhā, 4. Hūhū, 5. Viśvāvasu, 6. Ugrasena, 7. Surugi, 8. Parāvasu, 9. Citrasena, 10. Ūrṅāyu, 11. Dhṛtarāṣṭra and 12. Sūryavarcas. Lalitā triśatī nāma 177. Hāhā Hūhū mukha stutyā which says that She is worshipped by gandharva-s Hāhā and Hūhū. They worship the sun by means of their songs. Out of the twelve gandharva-s, two of them are active in each month. They are also subjected to miseries. They worship Her.

637. विश्वगर्भा
She has the universe in Her womb or the universe was delivered from Her womb. She delivers the universe and this is referred to in nāma 934 Viśva-mātā. Viśva means all that is visible, the whole universe. Because She delivered the universe from Her womb, She is addressed as Viśva-mātā.

638. स्वर्णगर्भा
She has the golden egg in her womb or She was born from a golden egg. Svarṇa means gold and hiraṇya also means gold. Vedānta Paribhāsā a 17th century scripture explains hiraṇyagarbha. It says “Hiraṇyagarbha is the first soul to be born and is different from Brahma, Viṣṇu and Śiva.” The subtle body consisting of the five vital forces, the mind, the intellect and the ten organs is produced from the five basic elements. This paves the way for the soul to experience the result of actions or in other words it causes karma-s. The subtle body is of two kinds, superior and inferior. The superior one is the subtle body of hiraṇyagarbha and the inferior is the subtle body of living beings. The subtle body of hiraṇyagarbha is called as mahat or the cosmic intellect and the subtle body of living beings is called ego. Su means splendid, arṇa means letters that form mantra-s and garbhaḥ is shining or conceiving. This way the nāma also means that She holds the sacred mantra-s in Her womb. This means that She is the cause of all mantra-s. Hence She is said to be in the form of mātṛkā-s (akṣara-s or alphabets). This has already been discussed in nāma 577 mātṛkā-varṇa-rūpinī. The alphabets lie shining in Her womb.

639. अवरदा
She is the destroyer of evil doers, known as demons. Evil doer does not merely mean the one who indulges in evil acts. It also means those who have evil thoughts. Evil thoughts culminate in evil actions.

640. वागधीश्वरी
She is the ruler of speech. Saundarya Laharī ends (100th verse) by saying ‘this was composed with your own words’. Nāma 577 can also be referred here. Origin of sound has already been discussed in detail under various nāma-s.

641. ध्यानगम्या
She can be attained by meditation. Meditation is a process that enables one to explore the entire human potential within. Meditation is not simply thinking about some super human forms. It is a complex task of researching internally. It is a process of spiritual transformation. It is the progressive level of consciousness accelerated by the combined factors of intention and attention. Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (I.ii.3) says “The sages went into deep meditation and saw the power of the luminous Cosmic Self as the cause of the universe. Māyā hides the Self behind the universe. The Self controls everything including the individual self and time.” She is that Cosmic Self.

642. अपरिच्छेद्या
She is incomprehensible hence, infinite. She is ubiquitous, the unique quality of the Brahman. Yet Her devotees can attain Her through meditation (previous nāma).

643. ज्ञानदा
She is the giver of knowledge, the kind of knowledge that is needed to realize Her absolute form. For realizing the Brahman one needs to have pure knowledge unafflicted by senses. She alone is capable of providing that knowledge. Through the process of meditation, mundane knowledge is transformed into consummate knowledge. First She provides the requisite knowledge then She reveals Herself and finally She makes him merge with Her. Knowledge is the primary step in Self-realisation and She provides that knowledge. Śiva sūtra (I.2) says jñānam bandhaḥ This means limited knowledge is bondage. Therefore, it implies that un-vitiated knowledge gives liberation.

644. ज्ञानविग्रहा
Her body itself is knowledge. The previous nāma said that She gives knowledge and the source of such knowledge is Her entire body. Ramaṇa Mahariṣi (sage Ramana) did not initiate any one through mantra-s. He used to initiate his disciples by a simple glance. That glance used to transform a person. What is the result of such transformation? Recent scientific study explains thus. “Conscious experience is much more than physics plus biology. What sets human consciousness apart from other biologically evolved phenomena is that it makes the reality appear within itself.”

645. सर्ववेदान्तसंवेद्या
She is known through Vedanta. Vedānta literally means ‘the highest knowledge’. Veda-s are the source of highest knowledge. Veda-s are classified into four categories. They are mantra-s, brāhmaṇa, āraṇyaka and Upaniṣad-s. Mantra-s are collection of Vedic hymns. Brāhmaṇa deals with Vedic rituals or sacrifices. Āraṇyaka is the combination of rituals and study of atman or Brahman. Finally, the Upaniṣad-s. They are the monument of spirituality. Veda-s lead to spirituality from gross level to subtle level. Since Upaniṣad-s provide the highest knowledge, the knowledge about the Brahman, they are known as Vedānta. There are several Upaniṣad-s and studying all of them is a time consuming process. This led sage Vyāsa to write Brahma sūtra-s, which is the condensed form of Upaniṣad-s, without diluting their teachings. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (XV.15) “I am the only object worth knowing through Veda-s. I alone am the father of Vedanta and knower of the Veda-s too.” This nāma says that She can be realised through Vedānta (Upaniṣad-s). In other words, Her true form can be realized only through Vedanta that provides the subtle knowledge required to realise the Brahman. {Further reading on Vedānta: Advaita Vedānta is the highest view of Reality, born of experience. Vedānta forms the end portion of Veda-s. Śrī Śaṁkara says, “sarvāsāṁ upaniṣadām ātma-yāthātmyanirūpaṇenaiva upakṣayāt सवाुसाीं उपननषदाम ् आत्म-याथात्मय-ननरूपणेनैव उपक्षयात ्॥ This means all the Upaniṣad-s exhaust themselves in discussing Ātman. It is felt that Ātman alone is worth discussing. Everything else is superimposed on Ātman. Ātman when present in a living being is called ātman or soul and the collective forms of all the souls of the universe or all the ātman-s put together is known as Brahman. The entire elucidations of Upaniṣad-s is provided in a condensed form in Brahma sūtra-s. In order to avert any confusion, Lord Kṛṣṇa told Arjuna the secrets of Brahman in the form Bhagavad Gīta. Out of this sacred triad, Bhagavad Gīta is easily understandable, as the Brahman Himself (Lord Kṛṣṇa) says what is needed to attain liberation. Thorough understanding of Bhagavad Gīta is bound to provide liberation. Vedānta does not preach religion and its associated rituals. Vedānta has no known bounds. Vedānta evolves in three stages in human life and they are dvaita, viśiśtādvaita and advaita. When a person chooses to pursue spiritual path and when he makes enquiries to understand the Brahman, these three stages dawn one after another. Vedānta Paribhāṣā says that the aim of Vedānta is of two kinds, primary and secondary. Of these pleasure and absence of pain are primary aims and the means to either of them is secondary aim. Again pleasure is of two kinds – relative and absolute. The relative pleasure is a particular manifestation of a modicum of bliss caused by difference in the mental state generated by a contact with objects. In general a Vedāntin acquires knowledge through the following six means – perception, inference, comparison, verbal testimony, presumption and non-apprehension. Vedānta says that pure consciousness has three forms – the one associated with the subject or the knower limited by the mind, the second is associated with the object and the third one is associated with the mental state. The arena of the mental state serves to remove nescience or avidyā. Therefore, Vedānta is composite and comprehensive philosophy that leads to the Supreme Reality, the Brahman.}

646. सत्यानन्दस्वरूपिणी
She is in the form of truth (satya) and eternal happiness (ānanda). The eternal happiness cannot be attained without knowing the truth. Truth leads to eternal happiness. To attain bliss, truth cannot be overlooked. Here truth means the philosophy of advaita or nondualism which leads to the Brahman. Taittirīya Upaniṣad says (II.vi) “Brahman manifested itself as all things around us, those who know Brahman call it “Truth”. Therefore Truth means the Brahman, the one and the only one that exists all across the universe in the form of different objects. If this truth is realized, it leads to ānanda, the happiness. This nāma also refers to Her eternity, the unequalled nature of the Brahman, sat-cit- ānanda. When one progresses spiritually, first he realizes bliss (ānanda), before realising the Brahman.

647. लोपामुद्रार्चिता
Lopāmudrā is the wife of sage Agastya. This nāma says that She is worshipped by Lopāmudrā. The following scene is narrated in Lalitā triśatī pūrva bhāga. When Hayagrīva was reluctant to share triśatī with sage Agastya due to the restrictions imposed by Lalitāmbikā, She appeared along with Śiva before Hayagrīva and asked him to initiate sage Agastya into triśatī. She said “triśatī rendered by both of us (Śaktī and Śiva) is known as sarva pūrtikarī (completion of everything). By reciting this, all unfinished karma-s are fulfilled (leading to liberation). You can initiate this to Agastya, whose wife worships me with great devotion.” Such was the devotion of Lopāmudrā to Lalitāmbikā. Lopāmudrā worshipped Her with Her Pañcadaśī mantra. A reference can be made to nāma 238. Līlā-klṛpta-brahmāṇḍa-maṇḍalā लरला-कल्ृत-ब्रह्माण्ड-मण्डला (648) She handles creation of the universe with ease, as if it is a sport. She framed rules and regulations for the three acts, creation, sustenance and death. The divine law is the ‘law of karma’. Since She is not transgressing the law framed by Her, She finds Her job easy. A reference can be made to nāma 281.

648. लीलाकॢप्तब्रह्माण्डमण्डला

649. अदृश्या
She is invisible. She cannot be seen through biological eyes or any other senses. She can only be realized in consciousness, as She is so subtle (kāmakalā and kuṇḍalinī) and is beyond visual perception. Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (III.iv.2) explains this situation. “You cannot see that is the witness of vision.” Vision is an act involving objects. But it does not reveal the inner Self that pervades it. Her form can only be realized through meditation.

650. दृश्यरहिता
She transcends visibility. This is an extension of the previous nāma. It can also be said that the previous nāma refers to Her kāmakalā form and this nāma refers to Her kuṇḍalinī form. She is in the form of supreme knowledge that is beyond comprehension.

651. विज्ञात्री
She is the knower. She knows all. Knowing it all is an exclusive quality of the Brahman. Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (II.iv.14) explains this. “Through what should one know That, owing to which all this is known. Through what, should one know the Knower?” Here That and Knower mean the Brahman. A Selfrealised person could discriminate between Real from unreal. There remains only the subject, which is Absolute and without a second. She is that Absolute form, an embodiment of knowledge.

652. वेद्यवर्जिता
She has nothing to know, again a quality of the Brahman. She is omniscient. This is an affirmation to the previous nāma.

653. योगिनी
She is the in the form of yoga. Yoga means the union of Self and self. She stands united with Śiva. Yoga is the process of harmonising body, mind and soul with an intent to free the soul from bondage that leads to its final liberation. Final liberation of the soul is also known as emancipation, salvation, etc. This nāma could also be referring to the yogini-s who preside over the nine āvaraṇa-s (roundabouts) of Śrī Cakra. Yogini also refers to a particular time-effect in Indian astrology. Yogini-s like ḍākinī control seven cakra-s of the cerebro-spinal system that has already been discussed in this Sahasranāma (introduction to yogini-s and in nāma-s 475 to 534)

654. योगदा
She bestows yoga on Her devotees. The desire for yoga (union of soul with God) arises because of Her grace.

655. योग्या
She can be attained by yoga. She is yoga Herself, She is the giver of yoga and can be attained by yoga. Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (I.12) says that one has to know the Brahman residing within and affirms that there is nothing higher than the knowledge that is required to know the Brahman. The enjoyer (nāma 653), the object of enjoyment (present nāma) and the provider of enjoyment (nāma 654) are all Brahman. Kṛṣṇa says (Bhagavad GītaVI.23) “That state called yoga, which is free from the contract of sorrow, should be known and should be resolutely practiced with an unwearied mind.” Sage Patañjali says in his yoga sūtra (I.2) “Yoga is the control of the urges, modifications or tendencies that arise out of the mind stuff.” Kṛṣṇa explains yoga in Bhagavad Gīta in an elaborate manner.

656. योगानन्दा
She is in the form of bliss that is attained through yoga. She attains bliss when She attains Śiva. We derive bliss when we attain Her. Till the stage of bliss two different objects are required and if one transcends bliss, there exists only One, no second. It is said that the stage of deep sleep is the typical example of bliss, where one is totally disconnected from the external world. Internally the mind alone ceases to function and all other biological organs continue to function. This stage is known as yoga + ānanda or yogānandā. Nārasiṃha (Narasiṃha) avatar of Viṣṇu is also known as Yogānanda. Yogānandā is the combination of ayoga + nanda. Ayoga means without attachment. Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (III.ix.26) says, “It is imperceptible, for It is never perceived. It is imperishable, because It never decays. It is unattached, because It is never attached.” Nanda refers to the river Ganges. Nanda also refers to Her birth to Nandagopan (Śrīmad Bhāgavata). River Sarasvatī at the foot of Himalayas is also known as Nanda. Nanda also refers to certain lunar days. Nanda also means happiness. Then the nāma means that She remains in the state of bliss without any attachment. This could also mean that one can attain the state of bliss if one remains unattached to the materialistic world.

657. युगन्धरा
Yuga means a time period. The existence of the universe is divided into four time periods. Several years form a yuga. The four yuga-s are 1. Kṛita or Satya, 2. Tretā, 3. Dvāpara, 4. Kali, of which the first three have already elapsed, while the Kali began at midnight between the 17th and 18th of Feb. 3102 B. C. Each yuga said to consist of thousands of years forming a cycle and the total period of all yuga-s is 4.32 million years. At the end of this cycle, mahāpralaya or the great dissolution (annihilation) takes place and the next cycle of creation begins. She is the controller of this cycle of time. The word yuga also means yoke or a connection between two objects of the same group or a pair. In this context it can be said that She connects Śiva with Herself. This goes to prove the fact either Śiva or Śaktī as an independent entity cannot function without this yoke.

658. इच्छाशक्तिज्ञानशक्तिक्रियाशक्तिस्वरूपिणी
She is in the form of three energies – the energy of will, the energy of wisdom and the energy of action. These energies form a part of trīśikā. Trīśikā (tri + iśikā) means analysis of three. Tri means three and iśikā means Īśvarī, the power, abiding in divine consciousness. She is the controller of all triads in the process of creation. For example, the three acts of the Brahman, creation, sustenance and dissolution. Though She is said to be Īśvarī of creation, etc, She is not different from Śiva. The supreme divine consciousness on the point of expansion according to Her inherent nature is Icchā śakthi. The actual process of expansion is jñāna śakti and the process of diversity leading to creation of the universe is kriyā śakti. The One who is the possessor of all three śakti-s or energies is known as parā-śakti or the Supreme energy. Śrī Tantrālokaḥ (III.111) says “When the power of action reflects upon soma (the essence of ecstasy), sūrya (the sun) and agni (the fire) and we attain the indivisible Light that is our absolute bindu.” When kriyā Śaktī is accomplished in the phases represented by icchā śaktī and jñāna śaktī, in the inner manifestation, the Supreme Reality of Śiva is realized.

659. सर्वाधारा
She supports everything in this universe or everything rests on Her. She supports the universe with the aid of three energies discussed in the previous nāma. She is in the form of both gross matters and subtle matters (Her subtlest form is kuṇḍalinī). All that exists between these two extremes are supported by Her. She has the will to support, She has the knowledge to support and She supports with Her actions (creation, sustenance and dissolution).

660. सुप्रतीष्ठा
She is the foundation of all existence. This nāma signifies that without Her will, knowledge and action none can exist. Foundation is deeper than support. Kṛṣṇa says (Bhagavad Gīta VIII.20, 21) “Beyond this Unmanifest, there is yet another unmanifest Existence, that Supreme Divine Person, who does not perish even though all beings perish. The same Unmanifest which has been spoken of as the Indestructible is also called the supreme goal; that again is My supreme abode, attaining which, they return not to this mortal world.”

661. सदसद्रूपधारिणी
She is in the form of sat and asat. Sat means permanent and asat means not permanent. There is nothing permanent except the Brahman, therefore Brahman is sat. All are impermanent except the Brahman and therefore the universe with all its existence is asat. She is in the form of both permanent and impermanent or existent and non-existent. Impermanency is the product of permanency. Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II.vii) says, “At first there was no world. There was only Brahman. The world was then in Brahman, who was unmanifested. The world, with all its names and forms then manifested itself.” The exact wording of the Upaniṣad is ‘idam agre asat vai asit. (idam – this phenomenal world; agre – originally; asat vai asit – was non-existent.) Chāndogya Upaniṣad (VI.ii.2) asks, “What proof is there for this that from nothing something has emerged? Before this universe came into existence, there was only one existence without a second.” Sage Patañjali also says, (I.9) “Verbal delusion follows from words having no corresponding reality.” This nāma says that asat came into being from sat or the universe came into existence from the Brahman. If the Brahman is known as Śiva, then the universe is known as Śaktī. There is no difference between Śiva and Śaktī (refer nāma 999). Impermanency follows permanency or asat follows sat. Sat and asat coexist. If they do not co-exist, then there is neither Brahman nor universe. Sat and asat are human perception but in reality they are not different. Asat is the mirror image of sat.

662. अष्टमूर्तिः
She is eight fold. Both Śiva and Śaktī are eight fold. Eight forms of Śiva are Bhava, Śarva, Īśāna, Paśupati, Rudra, Ugra, Bhīma and Maha. Śaktī’s eight forms are known through Brāhmī, Māheśvarī, Kaumāri, Vaiśnavī, Vārahī, Māhendri, Cāmundā and Mahālakṣmī. It is said that a soul is divided into eight categories based on the quality of the soul. If soul is embedded with more karma-s, it is not considered as pure and the soul with least karmic account is considered as pure. The purest forms of the souls are not born in the earth, but born as angels or super human forms. Taking these as the two extremes, the eight forms of the soul are classified as follows. 1. Soul or jīva, 2. Inner self or antarātman, 3. Supreme Self or Paramātman, 4. untainted-ātman or nirmalātman, 5. pure self or śudhātman, 6. knowledgeable self or jñānātman, 7. great self or mahātman, 8. basic self or bhūtātman. The five basic elements and sun, moon and soul are considered as the eight types of bodies. The authors of this Sahasranāma are eight Vāc Devi-s. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta(VII.4 and 5) “Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, reason and ego constitute my eightfold. This indeed is My lower nature.” When Kṛṣṇa says lower nature, naturally there has to be a higher nature which is known as the Supreme Consciousness or the Brahman. Based on the principle of omnipresent nature of the Brahman, whatever form of existence is the beingness of the Brahman only. These eight dimensional forms or attributes merge together to form the Brahman. It would be wise to say that these eight dimensional forms originated from the Brahman and each of the eight forms of Śiva or Śaktī represents an aspect of the Brahman. Be it multidimensional or non-dimensional, every part of existence is Her form only, which is in conformity of Her omnipresent nature.

663. अजाजेत्री
Ajā means ignorance and jetri means victory. She has overcome ignorance. After all, She is the embodiment of knowledge and where is the question of ignorance in Her? Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (IV.5) uses the word ajā frequently. It says “Nature creates creatures like Her (which means all the living beings are represented by Her). They are made up of fire, water and earth. An ignorant man is drawn towards the sense world and happily remains there. But a knowledgeable man from his earlier experience rejects the world of senses.” Therefore, knowledge means the ability to discriminate between good and bad. This capacity to discriminate is known as knowledge. This nāma says that She helps Her devotees to gain this knowledge. The above Upaniṣad also says that aja is a state without manifestation, possibly indicating the stage of avyaktā (nāma 398).

664. लोकयात्रविधायिनी
The three acts of God are referred as loga-yātrā which means the journey of the world. A physical body begins its journey into this world by birth, nourished by the act of sustenance and destroyed by death. This happens continuously. A soul born in a form today enters another form after the death of the physical body. This process continues. There are exceptional souls that are not reborn. This nāma says that She is responsible for this cycle of birth-deathrebirth.

665. एकाकिनी
She is alone. All the three acts of Divine creation, sustenance and dissolution are done by Her all alone. Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad says (I.iv.2) ‘If there is nothing else except me, what I am afraid of.’ This is the advantage of being alone. Fear is a major impediment in spiritual progress. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (VI.ii.1) says “ekam eva advitiyam” which means ‘the one without a second’. Before the manifestation of the universe, creation was in the form of avyaktā without a second. She exists without anyone else co-existing with Her. This can be viewed from another angle as well. All the living beings in this universe are nothing but the reflections of the Brahman, who is all alone. The fact of Brahman being all alone is discussed in all Upaniṣad-s. Kaṭha Upaniṣad says (II.ii.9) ‘The same Self is in every living being that are different in forms. Due to our ignorance we consider every living being as different’. Rig Veda (I.164.46) says “ekaṁ sad viprā bahudha vadanty” which means ‘learned call One by many names’. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma nāma 725 is ‘ekahā’ which conveys the same meaning. This nāma says that the entire administration of the universe is being carried out exclusively by Her. She need not consult another person for any of Her acts. The question may now arise about other deities that are spoken of in this Sahasranāma. They merely follow up the work initiated by Her. There is difference between decision and implementation. She decides and others implement.

666. भूमरूपा
Bhūma means the Brahman. She is in the form of Brahman. Having discussed the qualities of the Brahman in the previous nāma-s, once again Vāc Devi-s confirm Her as the Brahman. Brahma Sūtra (I.iii.8) says, “Bhūman” which means infinite. There is no difference between Brahman and Bhūma. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (VII.23) says “Yah vai bhūma tat sukham” which means that which is infinite that is happiness. The Upaniṣad further says “there is no happiness in the finite and happiness is only in the infinite. But one must try to understand the nature of That infinite.” For understanding the infinite only meditation coupled with self enquiry alone helps. Kūrma Purāṇa says that one energy, the wife of Śiva becomes many through limitation and She does the entire acts in His presence like a play. Limitation means limiting factors of size, shape, form, qualities that are applicable to all living beings. No living species can ever cross the prescribed limitations. Limitlessness or infinity is the quality of the Brahman.

667. निर्द्वैता
She is without duality. Dvaita means two, which means dualism. There are three types of Vedantic schools. The first one is dvaita, the second one is viśiṣṭādvaita or qualified non-dualism and the third one is advaita or non-dualism. Broadly there are three ways of realising the Supreme Self. In duality or dvaita God, soul and cosmos are considered as different. In non-dualism (nir-dvaita) or advaita God, soul and cosmos are the same and soul is not different from God. Souls appear as different because of māyā. In viśiṣṭādvaita or qualified non-dualism accepts God, soul and cosmos and the latter two depend upon God for existence. If God is not there, soul and cosmos are not there. This nāma says that She is the Brahman without duality, which was earlier confirmed in nāma 665. Brahman is the lonesome factor in advaita.

668. द्वैतवर्जिता
She is devoid of duality. The philosophy of dvaita considers the Brahman and soul as different. This nāma is an extension of the previous nāma and confirms Her status as the Brahman. Brahman is devoid of duality, as all beings are only Her reflections. Duality or dvaita will not lead to Self-realisation.

669. अन्नदा
‘Annam’ means food. She is the provider of food to the universe for its sustenance. Annam originates from its root word ‘ad’ meaning ‘to eat’. ‘Whatever beings exist in this world are products of food. They are sustained by food and in the end they dissolve into food. Food is called the remedy of all ills of living beings’, says Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II.2). Her act of sustenance is affirmed through this nāma.

670. वसुदा
She is the giver of wealth. Vasu means precious metals, stones and that kind of wealth. Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (IV.iv.24) says “that great, birth-less Self is the eater of food and the giver of wealth. He who knows this as such receives wealth”. The Upaniṣad further says that the ‘birth-less Self’ is to be meditated upon to derive the result (wealth). Vasu has other meanings as well such as excellent, good and beneficent. It also refers to eight types of Vedic gods whose chief is Lord Indra. Vedic gods represent each aspect of natural phenomena. For example, water is represented by Varuṇa also known as Āpa. According to Viṣṇu Purāṇa, the eight Vasu-s are 1. Āpa (water) 2. Dhruva, the Pole-star. 3. Soma, the Moon 4. Dhava or Dhara. 5. Anila, the wind 6. Anala or Pāvaka, the fire 7. Pratyusha, the dawn and 8. Prabhāsa, the light.

671. वृद्धा
Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (IV.3) says “You are a woman, you are a man, you are a boy and you are also a girl. You are an old person walking with the support of a stick. You are born in all possible forms”. This is one of the finest interpretations of “I am That”. This nāma says that She is the oldest, because She is mūlaprakṛtiḥ (nāma 397) and ādi śaktī (nāma 615). Being born as the first, She is said to be oldest. Śiva created Her and She created others. But She is beyond aging, a process applicable to all mortals. She is beyond modifications. This nāma means Her primordial nature.

672. ब्रह्मात्मैक्यस्वरूपिणी
We have to look at the beauty of this Sahasranāma. Vāc Devi-s after having discussed about the qualities of the Brahman now say that She is in the form of ‘Brahman-soul’ aikya (merger or union) form. Realising “ahaṁ Brahmaṁ asmi ” which means “I am the Brahman” is the end of spiritual pursuits. The nāma can be arranged as follows. Brahman + ātman + aikya + sva + rūpiṇī. Brahman means Śiva, ātman means jīva or the soul, aikya means combined, sva means haṃsa mantra and rūpiṇi means Her form. This means that She is in the form of haṃsa mantra, which unites the self with the Self (soul with the Brahman). This concept is referred to in Lalitā triśatī nāma 173 ‘haṃsa-mantraartha- rūpiṇī which means that She is the import of haṃsa mantra, where ‘ha’ means Śaktī and ‘sa’ means Śiva. The mental recitation of this mantra is related to inhalation and exhalation. When one could synchronize this mantra with his inhalation and exhalation of 21600 times a day, he realizes the Self. It is calculated that one inhalation and exhalation under normal circumstances takes about 4 seconds. In a minute there are 15 such inhalations/exhalations. In one hour (15 x 60) there are 900 inhalations/exhalations. In day (900 x 24) we breathe 21600 times. When haṃsa mantra is synchronised with our breath, we recite this mantra 21600 times daily. This is also known as ajapa japa. Ajapa means automatically. This nāma says that She is ‘That’ representing Brahman in the form of Brahman and representing ātman also in the form of Brahman thereby proving that everything that exists in this universe is the Brahman. This is advaita philosophy.

673. बृहती
She is great. Kaṭha Upaniṣad (I.ii.20) says mahato mahīyān which means bigger than the biggest. Bṛhatī also refers to thirty six syllable metre.

674. ब्राह्मणी
Śiva belongs to Brahmin community. Hence He is called Brāahmaṇā and his wife is Brāahmaṇī. It is like Bhairava and Bhairavī. “May I attain the fame of a Brahmin” asks Chāndogya Upaniṣad (VIII.14). Brahmin-s are those who are well versed in Brāhmaṇa (Vedic rituals) or one who has knowledge about the Brahman is known as Brahmin. Caste as religious doctrine of Hindu philosophy is often misinterpreted. Bhagavad Gīta (XVIII.42) gives a definition of Brahmin: “Serenity (controlling mind from running into world-of-objects seeking sense enjoyment), self-restraint (controlling the sense organs which are the gateways through which external world of stimuli infiltrates into our mental domain and mars our peace), austerity (conscious physical self-denial in order to economise the expenditure of human energy so lavishly spent in the wrong channels of sense-indulgence and conserving it for reaching the higher unfoldment within called tapas, purity (both external cleanliness and internal purity), forbearance (to be patient and forgiving and thus to live without struggling even against wrongs done against one), uprightness (this is the quality which make an individual straightforward in all his dealings and his uprightness makes him fearless in life), knowledge (about the highest goal of life, of the nature of spirit, in short, knowledge of all that the Upaniṣads deal with), wisdom (knowledge digested and assimilated brings home to man an inward experience and thereafter, he comes to live his life, guided by this deep inner experience. Knowledge can be imparted, but wisdom is to be found by the individual in himself), faith (unless one has a deep faith in what one has studied and lived, the living itself will not be enthusiastic and full).” These are the words of Swami Chinmayananda in his book The holy Geeta.

675. ब्राह्मी
Brāhmī is the Goddess of speech and also known as Sarasvatī. Brāhmī is said to be the feminine gender of Brahman. Brahman – Brāhmī. This is like Bhairava and Bhairavī. She is one of the aṣṭa mātā-s.

676. ब्रह्मानन्दा
She is in the form of eternal bliss. Taittirīya Upaniṣad (III.6) says “He came to know that bliss is Brahman, for it is from bliss that all these beings are born. Having been born, these are supported by bliss and when they perish they go back to bliss and disappear into it”. This is the bliss that is realized in the sheath of knowledge says this Upaniṣad.

677. बलिप्रिया
Bali means offering daily, a portion of a meal to all creatures. This is also known as bhūta yajñā. She is fond of those who make such offerings to creatures daily (refer nāma 946. pañca yajñā priyā). Bhūta yajñā is one of the five yajñā-s. Bali also means mighty warriors who are able to win over internal and external enemies. Internal enemies are senses and mind. For enlightenment, one needs strong physical body and mind. Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (III.ii.4) says “Ātman is not attained by those who do not have strength”. Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II.viii) also uses words such as dṛḍhiṣṭhaḥ meaning well built and baliṣṭhaḥ meaning very strong, the two among many requirements to have an idea of happiness that the Brahman represents. She is fond of such people who have physical as well as mental strength to realise Her. Bali also means offerings made to other gods and goddesses. She is fond of such offerings made to Her assistants as all gods and goddesses are ruled by Her.

678. भाषारूपा
She is in the form of languages. Languages are the source of learning and understanding through sound. This nāma implies that She is the cause for learning and understanding. She is the Śabda Brahman. It is said that Śaktī represents sound and Śiva represents meaning. Śiva and Śaktī are united like word and its meaning. When word and its meaning are separated, the word or the sound becomes meaningless. They are interdependent. So are Śiva and Śaktī.

679. बृहत्सेना
She has a mighty army. She administers the universe with the help of this army. This nāma is to be read along with nāma 677.

680. भावाभावविवर्जिता
She is free from existence as well as non-existence. Bhāva and abhāva are the terms of Vedanta. Bhāva means existence and abhāva means non-existence. Experimentation and observation, rather than theory of existence is bhāva. Māyā or illusion is the material cause for abhāva or non-existence. Abhāva is of four types. 1. Prāgabhāva: Non-existence of a thing prior to its production. Cloth is made out of yarn. When yarn existed, cloth did not exist. Yarn was transformed into cloth. 2. Dhvaṁsābhāva: Non-existence after destruction. Yarn in its original form did not exist after cloth was produced. 3. Atyantābhāva: Absolute nonexistence. According to advaita philosophy, only the Brahman is the absolute non-existence. 4. Anyonyābhāva: Mutual non-existence. For example a pot is not cloth, nor is a piece of cloth a pot. This is known as ‘this is not that’. Upaniṣad-s elucidate Brahman by saying ‘not this, not this’ (neti, neti). An ignorant man considers soul as different from the Brahman. But according to advaita, soul and the Brahman are the same. They are considered as different because of ignorance or avidyā. Abhāva or non-existence of an object or an attribute is cognized neither by sense perception nor by inference, but is known directly by its non-apprehension or non-perception. Brahma Sūtra (II.ii.28) says “nābhāva upalabdheḥ नाभाव उपलब्धेः” which means that external objects are non-existent, for they are perceived. This talks about internal awareness through which alone the Existent can be realized. This nāma says that She is both existent, eternal and non-perishable (the Brahman) and non-existent limited and perishable (māyā).

681. सुखाराध्या
She can be worshipped without undergoing any difficulties. For example, fasting, walking on fire, etc. When someone is harming his body during worship, he harms Her (in literal sense) within. Body should not be made to suffer while seeking Her within. A healthy body is pre-requisite for Self-realisation. Only ignorant people choose to afflict their bodies in the name of asceticism. Body is like a temple, heart chakra is sanctum-sanctorum and the Brahman within is the idol. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (XVII.6) “Those men who perform stern austerities, not enjoined by the scripture, due to hypocrisy and egoism, impelled by desire and attachment, who torment the elements (pañcabhūta-s or five elements), in the body, know these ignorant people, to be demoniacal resolves.” While worshipping Her, none should cause harm to his body, as this amounts causing injury to Her within (though She is incapable of being injured. If one develops such feelings of oneness with the Divine, realisation automatically happens). Nothing is achieved by fasting or other austerities. But this does not mean that one can overindulge. Ultimately, it is only the meditation coupled with moderation lead to Self-realization.

682. शुभकरी
One may nurse doubts that by not following austerities, She may cause harm. In order to avert this confusion, Vāc Devi-s have placed this nāma here. She always does good things for Her devotees. This nāma says that even if She is imperfectly worshipped, She does only auspicious things for Her worshippers. After all She is Śrī Mātā. What is required in Her worship is True Love for Her. Mere thought about Her brings auspiciousness. Śiva means auspiciousness. She is Śiva’s consort and hence She provides auspiciousness.

683. शोभनासुलभागतिः
This nāma is an extension of the previous nāma. What type auspiciousness does She give? This nāma answers this question. Śobhana means anything propitious or auspicious (the underlying meaning is liberation), sulabh means easily accessible or attainable and gati means path. The path of worshipping Her easily provides salvation or liberation. Technically mokṣa is different from salvation. In the case of mokṣa the soul is reborn after remaining dormant for some time in the Heavens. This period of its sojourn depends upon its positive karmic account. If this is exhausted, the soul is born again to undergo the negative karmic account. But in the case of liberation, the soul is eternally freed from births and deaths by merging with the Brahman. Nāma 462 Śobhanā meaning the beauty embodied and endowed with auspiciousness. Nāma 972 is aśobhanā also meaning beautiful. Śobhan in Sanskrit means shining, splendid, beautiful, lovely, good, auspiciousness, fortunate, lustre, brilliant, etc. Vāc Devi-s have used śobhanā three times in this Sahasranāma and each of them conveys different meanings. Some divide this nāma into two nāma-s: Śobhanā and sulabhāgatiḥ. Some others divide this into three nāms: Śobhana, sulabha and agatiḥ. In whatever manner this nāma is divided, there is no significant change in the meaning. It is also said that one who got initiated into Pañcadaśī and ṣodaśī mantra-s by the right Guru is not reborn.

684. राजराजेश्वरी
Nāma-s 684 to 689 begin with Rāja She is Īśvarī for Brahma, Viṣṇu and Rudra who are known as Rāja-s or kings. Kubera, the god of wealth is also known as Rājā-rāja. Since She is worshipped by him, She is known as Rāja-rājeśvarī. Śiva is Rājarājeśvarā and His consort is Rājarājeśvarī. Ādi Śaṅakarā describes Rājarājeśvarī in his Śrī Mantra Mātṛkā Puṣpamālā as follows. “The one who has akṣara hrīṁ as the last bīja of each of three kūṭa-s of Pañcadaśī mantra, the one who is fond of saṃyā, a type of mental worship, the one who considers all beings as Her family and being worshiped through haṁsa (ajapa mantra) mantra in tantric way, the one who is in the form of compassion known as Kāmākṣī, the one who is known through the bīja śrīṁ (ि ीं) of śodaśī mantra (If śrīṁ is added to Pañcadaśī mantra, the fifteen lettered Pañcadaśī mantra, becomes sixteen lettered śodaśī mantra. But in application, śodaśī mantra is recited in a different way. Please refer nāma 587), the one who is in the form of three Gods, Brahma, Viṣṇu and Rudra and the one who derives immense happiness in Śrī Cakra worship, I bow to this Rājarājeśvarī.”

685. राज्यदायिनी
Rājya-dāyinī means the one who is the giver of right to live in territories like Vaikuṇṭha (the abode of Viṣṇu) or Kailāsa (the abode of Śiva). Since She is the administrator of the universe, the destinations of the souls are decided by Her. The souls with good karmic account rest in dominions like Vaikuṇṭha and Kailāsa. This does not mean that these souls will not be incarnated. They will be born again after the expiry of their good karmic account. This process is called mokṣa. Liberation of the soul is different, where the soul merges with the Brahman not to be reborn again. Liberation can be attained only if there is no balance in karmic account, either good or bad. If one has the worst karmic account, his soul reaches the hell and undergoes sufferings and born again.

686. राज्यवल्लभा
She is Rājarājeśvarī, the queen of queens and capable of administering the universe. Brahma, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Indra and other gods and goddesses live in Śrī Cakra, the abode of Lalitāmbikā. It can be said that Rājya in these nāma-s refer to Śrī Cakra, where the entire gods and goddesses live. She is the ruler of Śrī Cakra, the abode of all gods and goddesses. This nāma is in confirmation of nāma 684.

687. राजत्कृपा
She is embodiment of radiating compassion, the primary quality of Śrī Mātā. Kṛpā means compassion.

688. राजपीठनिवेशितनिजाश्रिता
She establishes Her devotees in thrones. It is said in Śrī Devi Mahātmya (XV.19-21) that She had offered thrones to those who had surrendered unto Her. By offering corporeal prosperities like thrones, She tests one’s will power to resist materialistic temptations. If one chooses to ignore such material gains, She gives them a place in Her domain. This is how gods and goddesses were offered places in Śrī Cakra. Please refer to the quotation from Chāndogya Upaniṣad in nāma 693.

689. राज्यलक्ष्मी
Entire universe is Her Rājya or kingdom. Her kingdom has no territories, as the boundary of this universe is beyond human comprehension and infinite. She holds the entire wealth of this universe. This nama originates from Rājarājeśvarī (684) as only the Supreme authority can control the wealth of the universe.

690. कोशनाथा
Kośa means the wealth of a government. Since She is in total control of various Rājya-s or kingdoms, She is known as Kośanāthā. Kośa also means sheaths of physical body. As per Vedānta philosophy, there are five superimposed layers covering the human soul. Nāma 428 discussed about five kośa-s which means sheaths or layers or coverings. They are prāṇa-maya kośa, mano-maya kośa, vijñāna-maya kośa, ānanda-maya kośa and anna-maya kośa. The Self-illuminating Ātman inside our self is covered by these layers or coverings. She is in the form of That Ātman

691. चतुरङ्गबलेश्वरी
Caturaṅga means four. She has the mighty army of cavalry, elephants, chariots and infantry. Internally, it means antaḥkaraṇa (internal tools) consisting of mind, intellect, conscience (lower level of consciousness) and ego. Either way, She rules army (external) as well as antaḥkaraṇa (internal). Antaḥkaraṇa of a person is very powerful like an army and can wreck mayhem.

692. साम्राज्यदायिनी
Nāma 685 is Rājya-dāyinī and this nāma is Sāmrājya-dāyinī. Sāmrājya is higher than Rājya. Rājya is a kingdom ruled by a king or queen and Sāmrājya is the combination of many Rājya-s or kingdoms, known as empire. Assuming that kingdoms of Brahma, Viṣṇu and Śiva as Rājya-s, Her domain, encompassing these three worlds. Brahma loka, Vaikuṇṭha and Kailāsa is Śrī Cakra. She offers a place in Śrī Cakra to those who worship Her with dedication. In Śrī Cakra, between ninth and tenth forts, siddha-s (sages and saints) reside, reciting verses in Her praise. Therefore Sāmrājya means Śrī Cakra. There is a yajñā called Rājasūya yajñā. This yajñā is performed only be emperors and great rulers. The one who performed this yajñā is called samrāṭ. She is the bestower of samrāṭ as without Her grace Rājasūya yajñā is not possible. Taittirīya Upaniṣad (I.vi.2) says, āpnoti svārājyam, which means ‘realising his identity with the Brahman’. Sāmrājya is possible for those who have established their identities with the Brahman. They are known as Self-realized persons.

693. सत्यसन्धा
She has determination towards truth therefore She determines everything based on truth only. This nāma talks about the importance of Truth in Her administration. The vows made by Her cannot be defeated by any other force in this universe. She makes vow to sustain this universe as Śrī Mātā. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (VIII.i.5) says satyakāmaḥ meaning love of Truth and satyasaṅkalpaḥ which means committed to Truth. The Upaniṣad says ‘It is the cause of love of Truth and the cause of dedication to Truth. If a person strictly follows whatever the ruler of a country commands, he may then get as a reward some land, or even an estate.’ Śrīmad Bhāgavata (X.iii.25) says ‘We seek shelter in you....prompter of truthful speech as well as undifferentiating vision consisting of Truth, which is the highest means of attaining you.’ Viṣṇu Sahasranāma 510 is also Satyasandhā. This nāma gives extreme importance to Truth.

694. सागरमेखला
She wears the girdle made of oceans. The famous saying of Kaṭha Upaniṣad (I.ii.20) aṇoḥ aṇīyān mahataḥ mahīyān which means that the Brahman is smaller than the smallest and bigger than the biggest. Irrespective of the size of beings, they all come from the Supreme Self. In this context, this nāma describes Her as bigger than the biggest. That is why Vāc Devi-s talk about oceans, the huge water bodies forming Her girdle. Being the controller of the universe, this nāma says that She is in the form of earth, one of the planets of this universe and the entire water bodies of the planet earth forming Her girdle. From nāma 684 Rājarājeśsvarī till this nāma described the qualities of Rājarājeśsvarī.

695. दीक्षिता
A guru can give dīkṣā to his disciples. Dīkṣā is also known as initiation. In Śrī vidyā cult, first a mantra is initiated and depending upon the progress of the disciple dīkṣā is given purely at the discretion of guru. At that time a dīkṣā name is also conferred on the disciple like Ānandānanda, Kṛṣṇānanda, etc. As a principle, all such dīkṣā names end with ānanda, indicating the stage of bliss. Generally, dīkṣā is given based upon one’s knowledge that is required to realise the Brahman. This nāma says that She gives dīkṣā to Her disciples, in Her capacity as guru. Her status of guru was already discussed in nāma 603 gurumūrtiḥ. During initiation of mantra, sins of the disciple are destroyed. As She is an embodiment of compassion, She gives dīkṣā to Her devotees in order to absolve them of their sins. (This interpretation contradicts the Law of Karma which is also known as the Law of the Lord, which says, that the Brahman does not overrule His own laws. Sometimes, poetization permits these types of descriptions.) This nāma probably says that the guru who initiates is in Her form as Śrī vidyā cult does not differentiate between guru, mantra and devatā. These three are considered as a single entity.

696. दैत्यशमनी
She is the destroyer of demons. Demons mean evil forces (anger, lust, etc) operating within, thereby preventing Self-realisation. She destroys such evil forces. The very thought of Her is capable of destroying mental adversities.

697. सर्वलोकवशङ्करी
She subjugates all the worlds. Gāyatrī mantra talks about three worlds, bhūḥ bhuvaḥ and suvaḥ. But the Brahhma Gāyatrī mantra refers to seven worlds. They are bhūḥ, bhuvaḥ, suvaḥ, mahaḥ, janaḥ, tapaḥ and satyaṁ. Satya (Truth) loka (world) is the abode of the Brahman and bhūh is the earth. One has to move from the lowest world of bhūh to the highest world of satyaṁ. These worlds mean the different levels of consciousness. Since She is the Supreme administrator of the universe, Her authority of subjugation is implied.

698. सर्वार्थदात्री
She is the bestower of all human desires. There is a specific way of leading human life through puruṣārtha-s which means the end of human life. The end becomes complete only if one lives as per puruṣārtha-s which comprises of dharma (righteousness), artha (wealth), kāma (desire) and mokṣa (the liberation). These are known as caturvidha puruṣārtha-s. Literally speaking puruṣārtha-s mean ‘what is sought by men’. Out of these four, dharma and mokṣa are the purpose of Vedas as they explain their true nature and guide one to properly understand these two. These two are therefore considered as supreme among the four puruṣārtha-s and considered as spiritual in nature. The other two puruṣārtha-s, artha and kāma do not necessarily mean lower values. But the path of pursuing these two makes all the difference. If they are pursued with passion and desire, they become dangerous and if they are pursued for the purpose of simpatico existence, they are considered as benevolent. This nāma says that She is the provider of all such puruṣārtha-s. She provides this as the Supreme empress or Rājarājeśvarī (nāma 684) and Śrī Mātā (nāma 1).

699. सावित्री
She is in the form of Devi Sāvitrī. Gāyatrī mantra consists of vyāhṛti of bhūḥ, bhuvaḥ and svaḥ and twenty four lettered Gāyatrī mantra. This twenty four lettered Gāyatrī mantra is known as Sāvitrī. Śiva is known as Savitā meaning the Creator and His wife is Sāvitrī. Sun is also known as Savitā and Sāvitrī. There is an Upaniṣad called Sāvitrī Upaniṣad’. It says Agni is Savitā and air is Sāvitrī. God of water Varuṇa is Savitā and water is Sāvitrī. Air is Savitā and ākāś is Sāvitrī. Therefore, it can be understood that Savitā and Sāvitrī are the combined factors of Creation and mean Śiva and Śaktī. She is addressed in this nāma as the Creator. This nāma also means Her purity and hence She is worshipped by all gods and goddesses. Purity of thought and action is reflected in the body of a person, particularly his face, making him worthy of worship.

700. सच्चिदानन्दरूपिणी
She is in the form of sat-cit- ānanda. These three qualities constitute the Brahman. Sat means the existence, Cit means pure consciousness and ānanda means infinite bliss. In reality, these are not the constituents of the Brahman, as Brahman is without any attributes. They are the three fold aspects of the Brahman. But at the human level, they appear as separate attributes due to illusion or māyā. They succeed one after another during spiritual quest. First, the existence is realised, second the level of consciousness is improved to higher planes by purifying it and finally bliss is realised. This is the reason for realising them as individual attributes in a human being. In the Brahman they remain united as a single aspect. This nāma reaffirms Her status as the Brahman.

701. देशकालापरिच्छिन्ना
She is not limited by space (deśa) and time (kālā). Sage Patañjali in his yoga sūtra (aphorisms on yoga) says “He (the Brahman) is the teacher of teachers, not limited by time (I.26)”. This is the unique quality of the Brahman. All the beings are bound by space and time. In this Sahasranāma, there are many nāma-s that confirm the status of Brahman on Lalitāmbikā. But each of these nāma-s convey different qualities of the Brahman. It is also pertinent to note that Brahman is beyond qualities and attributes. For easier understanding Brahman is classified into two categories – saguṇa Brahman (with attributes) and nirguṇa Brahman (without attributes). Saguṇa Brahman is Śaktī and Nirguṇa Brahman is Śiva. One without the other becomes non-functional.

702. सर्वगा
She is omnipresent. This is the result of the previous nāma. When time and space are transcended, the resultant factor is omnipresence, yet another quality of the Brahman. There is a story about Her omnipresent nature. When She was doing penance, Brahma appeared before Her and offered a boon and She asked for the boon of being omnipresent. But this cannot be correlated with this Sahasranāma particularly in view of nāma-s 58 pañca-brahmāsanasthitā and 249 pañca -pretāsanāsīnā. Because of being Sarvagā, She is also Sarvajṇā (nāma 196), knower of everything (omniscient). The omnipresent nature also indicates that She is the soul of living beings. Īśa Upaniṣad says (5) “asya sarvasya antaḥ, asya sarvasya bāhyataḥ” which means the inner most being of all that constitutes its outside also’. Nārāyaṇa sūktam says (Mahānārāyaṇa Upaniṣad 13.5), “antar bhahisca tat sarvam vyāypya nārāyaṇa stitaḥ” which means ‘all that pervade both inside and outside is Nārāyaṇa. Śrī Devi Māhātmiyam 598 says, sarva svarupe sarveśe sarva śakti samanvite which means “embodiment of all beings, the supreme ruler and embodiment of all the powers”. This is the nature of Sarvagā.

703. सर्वमोहिनी
She casts Her spell on everybody. She casts Her spell through the effect of māyā. Omnipresent means that She is present in all the objects, whether perishable or non-perishable, present as contradictory attributes, present as opposites. This leads to bewilderment of Her nature. This nāma solves this bewilderment. This is explained in Śrī Devi Māhātmiyam (I.55) mahāmāyā ...... jnānināmapi cetāṃsi devī bhagavatī hi sā meaning that ‘the great māyā form of Devī Bhagavatī attracts even the minds of jñānī-s by casting Her spell.’ Śiva says in Kūrma Purāṇa “this supreme Śaktī is in me and is Brahman. This māyā is dear to me, it is infinite and the universe is bewildered by this.” Bhagavad Gīta (V.16) explains how She casts Her spell. “The omnipresent God (refer nāma 702 above) does not receive the virtue or sin of anyone. Knowledge is enveloped in ignorance. Hence it is those beings which are constantly falling prey to delusion (māyā).” Māyā means that power by which experience can be measured, as opposed to the Brahman which is immeasurable, as Brahman is omnipresent. That is why She is known as Prakāśa Vimarśa mahā māyā svarūpinī. Māyā is a deterrent factor in realising the Brahman. She will withdraw Her spell of māyā only for those who are spiritually advancing. {Further study on Prakāśa Vimarśa mahā māyā svarūpinī: The objective manifestation is “I am this”. This is called prakṛti. It has three guṇa-s namely sattva, rajas and tamas. They originate from three śaktī-s namely icchā, jñāna and kriyā. When one does not possess anything, where is the question of any object? When there is no object where is the question of ‘this’? At this stage both subject and object do not exist. When subject and object no longer exists, where is the question of will, or three śaktī-s namely, icchā, jñāna and kriyā. Here, out of the thirty six tattva-s thirty four are destroyed. By simply understanding that nothing belongs to him, one is able to remove the thirty four tattva-s that were preventing him to identify himself with the Supreme Self. Now he has only two more tattva-s remaining. They are Prakāśa and Vimarśa. All these thirty four tattva-s were created and controlled by Vimarśa only. Since Vimarśa is the sole reason for māyā, we can call Vimarśa as Vimarśa mahā māyā svarūpini. Why mahā and svarūpini. Mahā means great. Māyā is the greatest cause of all illusions and is the cause of ignorance. So mahā is added. Why svarūpini? Svarūpini means form. Vimarśa is Śaktī, the feminine gender. Why Śaktī-s is considered as feminine gender? Because, She not only creates the universe, but also nurtures it. When one understands this, he is close to realising the mahā māyā svarūpini. The next stage is to realise Prakāśa, which alone is Self-illuminating. Vimarśa with the help of Self-illuminating Prakāśa, reflects the Self illuminating light to the universe, without which universe cannot function. Therefore, to realise Prakāśa is anyone’s ultimate aspiration. It has already been seen that Vimarśa is the only creation of Prakāśa. Vimarśa is the absolute freedom of Will of Prakāśa, which is also known as svātantrya śakti. Prakāśa has given all powers to Vimarśa to create, sustain, delude, conceive and bless the universe. Without Vimarśa, Prakāśa cannot do these acts. Prakāśa is always alone and it does not have a second. It is ādi (beginning with or the first) and anādi (existing from eternity). This means, it exists from eternity. We always need a second one for creation. One alone cannot create. Same principle applies here. When Vimarśa identifies itself and unites with Prakāśa it is called the Absolute. We can call Vimarśa at this stage as Prakāśa vimarśa mahā māyā svarūpini”. Here Vimarśa is still with Prakāśa. This is called “the Absolute”. One has to surely go through Śaktī alone to realise the Śiva. It is argued that Śaktī alone, in the form of Vimarśa or Cit, can lead to realizing Śiva. It is also considered that Śaktī is feminine gender and Śiva is the masculine gender. Śaktī cannot function without Śiva and Śiva also cannot function without Śaktī. Both are interdependent. Therefore, when Śaktī stays with the Śiva, She is called the Absolute.}

704. सरस्वती
She is in the form of Sarasvatī, the Goddess for knowledge. Brahman is the embodiment of knowledge. Due to the effect of māyā people are bound by dyads. Sarasvatī is the form that is capable of dispelling the ignorance, the impediment in realizing the Brahman. Bhagavad Gīta (V.15) explains this reality by saying “Knowledge is enveloped in ignorance”. The entire universe is Her manifestation. To understand this, knowledge is required. She is the store house of knowledge (nāma 644 jñāna vigrahā) and She gives knowledge to those who seek this supreme knowledge (nāma 643 jñānadhā). She gives knowledge to those who are worthy of it. From the sinners, the highest form of knowledge is concealed by ignorance. Real knowledge is of no use for those who do not seek it. Sarasvatī is the wife of Brahma, the Creator. Brahma is different from the Brahman. Nāma 614 is sacāmara-ramā vāṇī-savya-dakṣiṇa-sevitā which says that Goddess Lakṣmī (Ramā) and Goddess Sarasvatī (Vāṇī) stand by Her side and fan Her’. In the present nāma it is said that She is Sarasvatī Herself. Sarasvatī is considered here as an attribute of the Brahman. Nāma 614 refers to the Brahman without attributes. Sarasvatī is one of the functional natures of Lalitāmbikā. Other functional natures are discussed in the next nāma. Vedas describe different functions of the Brahman in the form gods and goddesses. Two year old girl is known as Sarasvatī. According to ancient scriptures, Sarasvatī resides in the tongue of all human beings causing speech. In Śrī Devi Māhātmyam there are three main chapters – prathama caritra, madhyama caritra and uthama caritra. Each of these caritra-s is represented by Goddesses Durgā (nāma 190), Mahā Lakṣmī (nāma 210) and Sarasvatī (the present nāma). The combined form (samaṣṭi) of all these three Goddesses is Caṇḍikā चस्ण्डका (nāma 755).

705. शास्त्रमयी
She is in the form of śāstra-s (rules of righteousness). The bewilderment arises due to the influence of māyā. She is mahā māyā svarūpinī, which means that She is in the form of great delusion. Māyā is the confusion resulting from failure to understand. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (III.14.1) says sarvaṁ khalvidaṁ brahma which means ‘all this, no doubt is Brahman.’ The Upaniṣad says this with authority. If Upaniṣads do not affirm this, we have to understand the Brahman only through our inference. Hence Upaniṣads are considered as the source of knowledge. They make only affirmations and they do not draw inferences. That is why, Brahma Sūtra (I.i.3) says śāstra-yonitvāt which means ‘śāstra-s are the source of knowledge’ to realize the Brahman. Upaniṣad-s and śāstra-s provide valuable inputs to enable us to understand and realize the Brahman. These inputs are in the form of both affirmations and negations. For example, Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (III.ix.9) affirms, “The vital force is Brahman, which is called That”. This is emphasised by the last kūṭa of Pañcadaśī mantra ‘sa + ka + la = sakala (sakala means all) + hrīṁ (refers to Śiva + Śaktī) which says that everything in this universe (sakala) is Śiva and Śaktī (hrīṁ) (nirguṇa Brahman and saguna Brahman). This nāma means that entire parts of Her body is made up of śāstras only. Her breath is Veda-s (nāma 338), Her ego is mantra-s (nāma 204), Her words created epics (nāma 798), Her tongue created goddess Sarasvatī (nāma 704), Her chin created Vedāṅga-s. From upper portion of Her throat all the śāstra-s (this nāma), from the middle of Her throat medicine and archery, from the bottom of Her throat sixty four tantra-s (nāma 236) and from Her shoulders love (Brahmāṇḍa Purāna). {Further reading on Vedāṅga and Vedānta: Vedāṅga a limb of Veda-s, regarded as auxiliary to and even in some sense as part of the Veda-s and mostly written as Sūtra or aphoristic style. They are six in number 1. Śikṣā, the science of proper articulation and pronunciation, comprising the knowledge of letters, accents, quantity, the use of the organs of pronunciation, and phonetics generally, but especially the laws of euphony peculiar to the Veda. Many short treatises and a chapter of the Taittirīya-āraṇyaka are regarded as the representatives of this subject. 2. Chandas, the metre, represented by a treatise ascribed to Piṅgalanāga, which, however, treats of Prākṛit as well as Saṃskṛit metres, and includes only a few of the leading Vedic metres. 3. Vyākaraṇa, linguistic analysis or grammar, represented by Pāṇini's celebrated Sūtra-s. 4. Nirukta, explanation of difficult Vedic words. 5. Jyotiṣa, astronomy, or rather the Vedic calendar represented by a small tract, the object of which is to fix the most auspicious days for sacrifices. This is also known as astrology or jyotis. 6. Kalpa, ceremonial, represented by a large number of Sūtra works. Vedānta is complete knowledge of the Veda. This is the second and most important part of the Mīmāṃsā or third of the three great divisions of Hindū philosophy called Vedānta either as teaching the ultimate scope of the Veda or simply as explained in the Upaniṣads which come at the end of the Veda. This system, although belonging to the Mīmāṃsā and sometimes called Uttara-mīmāṃsā, examination of the later portion or jñāna- kāṇḍa of the Veda, is really the one sole orthodox exponent of the pantheistic creed of the Hindūs of the present day - a creed which underlies all the polytheism and multiform mythology of the people. Its chief doctrine, as expounded by Śaṃkara is that of Advaita i.e. that nothing really exists but the One Self or Soul of the Universe called Brahman or Paramātman, and that the Jīvātman or individual human soul and indeed all the phenomena of nature are really identical with the Paramātman, and that their existence is only the result of ajñāna, otherwise called avidyā or an assumed ignorance on the part of that one universal Soul which is described as both Creator and Creation. It is existence, knowledge and Joy, and as devoid of the three qualities or guṇa-s. The liberation of the human soul, its deliverance from transmigrations, and re-union with the Paramātman, with which it is really identified, is only to be effected by a removal of that ignorance through a proper understanding of the Vedānta. This system is also called Brahma-mīmāṃsā and Śārīrakamīmāṃsā, inquiring into Spirit or embodied Spirit. The founder of the school is said to have been Vyāsa, also called Bādarāyaṇa, and its most eminent teacher was Śaṃkarācārya. All the Upaniṣad-s are works on the Vedānta philosophy. The first and second of these Vedāṅga-s are said to be intended to secure the correct reading or recitation of the Veda, the third and fourth the understanding of it, and the fifth and sixth its proper employment at sacrifices.}

706. गुहाम्बा
There are two interpretations possible for this nāma. 1. Guhā means Lord Kārttikeya or Subrahmaṇya and ambā means Mother. She is Kārttikeya’s mother. Subrahmaṇya or Skanda is the son of Śiva and Pārvatī. There are many stories regarding the birth of Guhā. But He was created for the purpose of destroying demons (demons mean evil acts or persons indulging in evil acts). 2. Guhā also means concealed and ambā means Mother. Kaṭha Upaniṣad (I.iii.1) says “guhām praviṣṭau” which means ‘present in the cave of the intellect’. The Upaniṣad further explains that the two (Self and self) enjoy the fruits of actions, residing in the cave of the intellect, which is the best place for realization. It is said that self and Self are related to each other like light and shade. When self and Self are referred, it appears as if scriptures endorse duality, because self is not different from Self. But reasoning for this type of interpretation is provided in subsequent nāma-s. This nāma says that She is in a secret place.

707. गुह्यरूपिणी
This is an extension of the previous nāma. The previous nāma said that She is in a secret place and this nāma goes further and says that Her form itself is secretive. Duality is gross and non-duality is subtle. Guhāmbā (mother of Guhā) is gross and guhya rūpiṇī is subtle. Her kāmakalā form is subtler and Her kuṇḍalinī form is the subtlest. Further, duality is perishable and it does not transcend time and space. Non-duality is imperishable and transcends time and space. Everything associated with Her is secretive in nature. For example, Her Pañcadaśī or ṣodaśī mantra-s, Her rituals such as navāvaraṇa pūja, kuṇḍalinī, etc. Kaṭha Upaniṣad (II.i.12) says that when one knows the Brahman hidden in the secretive place, Brahman does not want to conceal Himself for him alone. After Self-realisation, the duality goes for ever and non-duality alone prevails. But Self-realisation is very rare says Kṛṣṇa. “Hardly one among thousands strives to realise me and only rare among them knows me in reality” (Bhagavad Gīta VII.3). There is an Upaniṣad called Guhya Upaniṣad and Kūrma Purāṇa says that She is Guhya Upaniṣad. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma nāma 542 is Guhyā.

708. सर्वोपाधिविनिर्मुक्ता
She is free from all limitations. This is also known as upādhi, due to which condition an unlimited thing appears to be limited. Another interpretation for upādhi is acquiring the character of an object in the vicinity. For example, Śiva is in crystal complexion and Śaktī is red complexioned (please recall dhyāna verse). When Śaktī sits by the side of Śiva, He also turns red. This is upādhi. Upādhi is of four types: Consciousness limited by - intellect, knowledge, individual and māyā. The true form of the Brahman is concealed by these upādhi-s. Sarva means entire, upādhi means conditions and vinirmuktā means free. This nāma means She is beyond all these upādhi-s. Brahman is beyond all upādhi-s. The previous nāma-s limited Her attributes by saying that She is the mother of Kārttikeya, She resides in a secretive place, limitations by forms such as Sarasvatī, Mahā Lakṣmī, etc. Brahman is omnipresent. Brahman is interpreted in two ways. One is nonduality and another is duality. The explanation of the Brahman in dualistic way is for those who are still associated with worshipping forms by involving in rituals. Interpretation of Brahman in nondualistic way is for the knowledgeable. But this dual interpretation does not mean that scriptures contradict each other. All of them convey the same Brahman, but the quality of the path is different. This nāma again confirms Her stature as nirguṇa Brahman.

709. सदाशिवपतिव्रता
Śiva has many forms and Sadāśiva (Sadāśiva means always happy or prosperous) is one among them. Following are the few interpretations of Sadāśiva. Brahma, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Mahādeva and Sadāśiva are the five elements viz. earth, water, fire, air and ākaś. Out of all the forms of Śiva, Sadāśiva form is considered as supreme, as He is the cause for re-creation that happens after deluge (mahā pralayā). Sadāśiva is the thirty fourth principle or tattva and the next two principles are Śaktī and finally Śiva, thus making thirty six principles. Principles are nothing but states of consciousness. Sadāśiva principle is the stage where the practitioner feels that ahaṁ idaṁ. Ahaṁ means I am and idaṁ means here. Idaṁ also refers to ‘something that is immediately following’. In this context ahaṁ idaṁ means that ‘I am here awaiting Śaktī and Śiva’ (refer nāma 999). This is the penultimate stage to Self-realisation. In the stage of Sadāśiva ‘I consciousness’ is still predominant and associated with icchā or will. Sadāśiva tattva leads to Śaktī which ultimately culminates in Śiva. There is nothing beyond Śiva. This nāma means She is the wife of Sadāśiva. Śiva is nirguṇa Brahman or the Brahman without attributes and Sadāśiva’s wife is saguṇa Brahman, as She is endowed with all the energies for creation, sustenance and dissolution.

710. सम्प्रदायेश्वरी
Saṃpradāya means the knowledge imparted through traditions. This knowledge is mostly associated with rituals and generally taught through guru-disciple relationship. It can also be said that Saṃpradāya is sacred traditions. This nāma says that She is the Īśvarī (chief) of all types of traditions. This nāma also means that Her mantra-s such as Pañcadaśī and ṣodaśī should be recited only after a proper initiation by a Guru. Here, Guru means a Self-realized person. In Śrī Vidyā worship, too much of importance is given to the rituals and devotees are made to spend more time in rituals rather than being with Her. Devotion is the one and the only factor that leads to realization. Rituals become a necessity only in the initial stages of knowing Her. Worshipping Lalitāmbikā should be done in privacy as everything associated with Her is secretive in nature (refer nāma 707). Samaṣṭi (group) pūja is not a good idea to realize Her. Sometimes it becomes difficult to find a proper guru. In such a situation one can have self-initiation, provided one understands the meaning of the mantra and the associated procedures (like nyāsa, etc). Guru is a must in Śrī Vidyā cult and in the case of selfinitiation either Śiva or Viṣṇu can be contemplated as one’s Guru. But this procedure is applicable only for rare cases. It is always better to get initiation through a guru in person as there are procedural formalities involved. There is a higher level of interpretation for this nāma. In reality, the Brahman is One. Brahman is contemplated as Śiva and Śaktī as two different entities. Differentiating between Śiva and Śaktī is traditionally accepted and followed. The same tradition also says that the one without the other cannot independently act, implying that they are same. Tradition does not say anything that is different from Veda-s, but they have their own style of interpretation. Basically, tradition is meant for the beginners. Tradition should pave way to reality of satyaṁ jñānam anantaṁ brahmā (Taittirīya Upaniṣad II.i.1). She is said to be the ruler of traditional knowledge.

711. साधु
In the poetic version of this Sahasranāma, verse 138 says sādhvī. This word has been split into two nāma-s – sādhu (711) + I (712). This is because nāma 128 is sādhvī . Lalitā Sahasranāma is unique because no nāma is repeated. Such repetition is known as punarukti doṣa (offence of repetition i.e. tautological) which is totally avoided in this Sahasranāma. Sādhu has number of interpretations such as to complete, to accomplish, to overpower, to understand, etc. Śaktī is known as parāhaṃta, the highest form of egoism. Her parāhaṃta quality is the cause for sustaining this universe. Both intellect and ego evolve from three guṇa-s (sattvic, rajas and tamas). The Brahman stands covered by the sheath of ego. Ego is a functional quality and hence Śaktī is called parāhaṃta. Śiva is static in nature and Śaktī is functional in nature. Functionality is the inherent quality of Śaktī. She is the cause for accomplishments and dispelling ignorance. Hence She is called Sādhu. Sādhu also means a person who does not cause any harm to others and has intent to do good things for others. This interpretation also suits Her quality.

712. ई
Ī stand for kāmakalā. Kāmakalā has been elaborately dealt with in nāma 322. kāmakalā rūpā. Kāmakalā is Her subtle form and Her subtlest form is kuṇḍalinī. The first vowel of Sanskrit is A (अ) and fourth vowel is Ī (ई). A means Viṣṇu and Ī means Śaktī, Viṣṇu’s sister. A+ Ī = Ī. Viṣṇu and His sister Śaktī is known by this bīja. There is another interpretation for this that is dealt with in nāma 715. Brahman becomes two, one is lineament and another is conditioned. Lineament is again divided into two masculine and feminine. Masculine is Viṣṇu and feminine is Śaktī, the consort of Śiva. Ī is a very powerful bīja as this is related to creation. Īṃ (ईं) bīja if properly used in ṣodaśī mantra gives mantra siddhi faster. This bīja gives the essence of amṛta bīja-s. Amṛta bīja s are ri, rī, li and lī (रर, रर, लल, लर). Kāmakalā in combination with agni bīja as ātma bīja gives innumerable benefits. Kāmakalā is complete only when three dots are placed on the top of Ī (ई) and when these three dots are connected a triangle is formed and resultant bīja is pronounced as Īṃ. These three dots are referred to in various Upaniṣads in the form of various triads. For example, Chāndogya Upaniṣad (VI.3.3) says ‘of those three elements, he made each one of them three fold.’ Numeric three has great significance in creation and this is represented by the three dots in bīja Īṃ. (Please recall three Śaktī-s icchā, jñāna and kriyā - nāma 658.) This nāma is pronounced as yai while performing arcana. Lalitā triśatī nāma 41 is Īkāra rūpā meaning that She is in the form of Kāmakalā.

713. गुरूमण्डलरूपिणी
This nāma subtly conveys that the meaning and interpretation of kāmakalā should be learnt only from a guru as this has intrinsic and subtle meaning. Most of these interpretations have already been dealt with elaborately. Guru maṇḍala means lineages of guru-s. Śrī Vidyā attaches great importance to guru and his lineage. Whatever guru says should be final. Lineage of guru is stressed because, rituals and certain procedures differ from maṇḍala to maṇḍala (maṇḍala here means group) and each maṇḍala follows different customs and practices. Each Śrī vidyā student will have three categories of gurus - Guru, parama guru (guru’s guru) and parameṣṭhi guru (parama guru’s guru). During navāvaraṇa pūja, all these guru-s are worshipped along with many other guru-s. This nāma says that She is in the form of guru maṇḍala. There is no difference between guru and Lalitāmbikā, hence this nāma. The first guru or ādi guru is Śiva. Guru is also worshipped in sahasrāra, where She conjoins Śiva.

714. कुलोत्तीर्णा
There are nine nāma-s beginning with kula and different interpretations were provided for them. In this nāma kula means the sum total of senses, both internal (antaḥkaraṇa) and external. This nāma says that She has transcended all the senses (saguṇa Brahman or Brahman with attributes, as nirguṇa Brahman or Brahman with attributes does not act and merely remains as a witness). This attribute of the Brahman is known as vimarśa form. Prakāśa is Śiva and Vimarśa is Śaktī.

715. भगाराध्या
Bhaga means solar disc (sūrya maṇdala). She is worshipped in solar disc. It is not possible for humans to enter solar disc. This nāma indirectly says that She should be worshipped secretively. Nāma 275 already said that She is in the centre of solar disc. Brahman alone is contemplated in the centre of solar disc. This Sahasranāma repeatedly emphasizes that She is the Brahman and this nāma is one among such affirmations. From the point of view of Kāmakalā, sun represents one dot and the other two dots are represented by moon and fire. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (I.vi.6) says “There is a deity within the orbit of the sun who is seen by yogis. His whole body glitters like gold.” The first alphabet of Sanskrit अ (a) in conjunction with ई gives rise to alphabet ए (e). A represents Śiva and Ī represents Śaktī (in contrast to nāma 712) and ae represents Śiva - Śaktī union and they are worshipped in sahasrārā secretively. The resultant letter ए almost looks like a triangle. Śrī Cakra is made up of triangles only and in the central triangle, She is worshipped. Śiva is in the form of bindu and Śaktī is in the form of triangle. Nāma-s 713, 714 and 715 are extensions of nāma 712.

716. माया
She is māyā. Māyā is illusion. The root of māyā is ma. Ma means ‘to measure’. It also means ‘leading to the idea of illusion’. Brahman is immeasurable but due to the influence of māyā, Brahman appears to be measurable. In other words, Brahman is beyond time and space but due to the influence of māyā Brahman appears as if bound by time and space. For easier understanding, Brahman is said to have two aspects – saguṇa (with attributes) and nirguṇa (without attributes). Nirguṇa Brahman in conjunction with māyā becomes saguṇa Brahman. The appearance of the universe is due to the projection by māyā. From the point of view of Vedānta consciousness is the subtlest of all existents. Pure consciousness is the basis of varied existence of the universe. All these variations are due to the superimposition of names and forms by māyā which is the principle of appearance that is neither real nor unreal. The Self-illuminating Brahman which is pure and limitless consciousness manifests as manifold souls in living organisms. The manifestation of the Brahman is noticeable only in the living beings, whereas it stands hidden in non-livings. In the case of human beings, the pure and limitless consciousness manifest as self with independent mind. Māyā is a mystery of omnipresent power that works like a supreme faculty of selftransformation. It appears in the form of deceptive masks producing only illusionary effects. Māyā covers the Brahman that exists in all beings in this universe. This covering is like a sheath or a veil. Unless this veil is removed, the Brahman cannot be realized. For removing this veil, knowledge is required. As long as the veil continues to remain, one continues to remain ignorant (avidyā). Macro-cosmic reflection of the Brahman is māyā. Śiva is the Brahman and Śaktī is māyā. Unless, Śaktī clears the path, Śiva cannot be realized and it is only Śaktī, who is capable of revealing Śiva. She reveals Śiva only if impurities of physical bodies, subtle bodies and casual bodies are totally removed. Hence, Śaktī worship is considered as important. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (VII.14) “For this most wonderful māyā of Mine, consisting of three guṇa-s (sattva, rajas and tamas), is extremely difficult to break through. Those who constantly adore me are able to cross it.” Lalitāmbikā - Viṣṇu relationship has been personified in several nāma-s of this Sahasranāma (nāma-s 280, 339, 893)

717. मधुमती
Madhu means honey and mati means intellect, knowledge, judgement, etc. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (III.i.1) says asau vā ādityo devamadhu which means ‘sun over there is honey to the gods.’ This Chapter of Chāndogya Upaniṣad is known as madhu vidyā. By drawing a comparison between honey and sun, the Upaniṣad proceeds to teach about self-realization. The Upaniṣad says that the sun represents the sum total of all auspicious work done by humans. That is why sun is liked by gods. Honey is the essence extracted from beehives. Honey is compared here to the essence of supreme knowledge, extracted from various sources. The source of honey to the beehives is innumerable bees and flowers. They are considered as gross knowledge and the extracted honey is compared to the refined knowledge. Patañjali says in his yoga sūtra-s (II.27) “his knowledge is of seven fold.” (Patañjali’s yoga sūtra-s mention eight limbs of yoga (aṣṭāṅga yoga). The eighth limb is emancipation. These seven steps are different from eight limbs of yoga.) Seventh fold is madhumati and this stage is where one acquires complete knowledge and the resultant mental satisfaction. These seven steps are known as bhūmikā in Yoga Vāsiṣṭha.

718. मही
Mahī means earth. This nāma means Her visibility. All along, Vāc Devi-s have been talking about Her subtle form. Earth is visible to our eyes, hence She is praised here as Mother Earth. Prakṛti is one of the two important tattva-s (principles), the other being Puruṣa. Prakṛti is unconscious and primordial matter which can be interpreted as planet earth. She manifests as planet earth. This nāma implies that those who cannot realize Her in subtle forms, can see Her in Her gross form. Contemplating Her subtle form requires the highest level of consciousness, for which mind is the sole factor.

719. गणाम्बा
Warriors of Śiva are known as gaṇa-s. Gaṇa is explained as certain troops of demigods considered as Śiva's attendants and under the special superintendence of the god Gaṇeśa. She is said to be the mother of such warriors. Gaṇa also means Lord Gaṇeśa. She is mother of Gaṇeśa who is the chief of Śiva’s gaṇa-s. Because of being chief of gaṇa-s, Lord Gaṇeśa is known as Gaṇapati.

720. गुह्यकाराध्या
Guhyakā-s are the warriors of Kubera, the lord of wealth, who is one of greatest devotees of Lalitāmbikā. There is a Pañcadaśī mantra in his name (Kubera is one of the riṣi-s of Pañcadaśī mantra. There are twelve riṣi-s for Pañcadaśī mantra (refer nāma 238). There is another interpretation. Guhya means secret and ārādhya means worship. In this context, this nāma means that She is worshipped in a secret place known as mūlādhāra, in Her subtlest form kuṇḍalinī.

721. कोमलाङ्गी
She has soft and tender body (recall nāma 460 Nalinī). She takes care of three primary acts of the saguṇa Brahman, creation, sustenance and destruction. She has won over innumerable demons. In spite of these tough assignments (assignments because, Śiva, the Supreme has assigned Her these duties) Her body is said to be soft and tender. She is not only soft and tender in Her bodily form, but alsi in Her mental arena. Because of being tender and soft She is flexible to Her devotees. This nāma could possibly mean Her subtlest form kuṇḍalinī.

722. गुरुप्रिया
Guru here means Śiva. She is fond of Śiva. If Śiva is Guru, then She is known as Guru patnī (patnī means wife). Guru patnī (Guru’s wife) is worshipful and should be given the same status, if not more, as that of Guru. Śiva is known as Guru, as He has taught entire tantra śāstra-s to Her. This nāma also means that She is fond of those gurus who disseminate Śrī vidyā cult, by initiating Her well known mantra-s like Pañcadaśī and ṣodaśī. Planet Jupiter is also known as Guru. He is the guru for gods and goddesses as opposed to Venus who is the guru for demons. She is fond of these guru-s. Nāma 603 guru-mūrtiḥ said that She is the Guru. Nāma 713 is guru-maṇḍala rūpinī.

723. स्वतन्त्रा
Sva apart from meaning ‘self’ also means the highest authority, Śiva. Therefore, this nāma means that She is the embodiment of sixty four tantra-s, that have been described in nāma 236 catuḥsaśti-kalā-mayī. Tantra śāstra-s do not fructify without invoking Her. Tantra also means dependence. Sva (Śiva) + tantra (dependence) = dependent on Śiva. This could mean the interdependence of Śiva and Śaktī. Kālikā Purāṇa says that “Śiva ever lives in that place sporting with His Śaktī.” This nāma can also be considered as a reaffirmation of nāma 236. Svatantrā also means the unobstructed Will of the Absolute. This is the Will Power of Śiva, the prakāśa form of the Brahman. Śiva, by means of Power of Attorney has transferred His Absolute and unobstructed Will to Śaktī and this transferred energy is called svātantrya śaktī. Śaktī, holding this energy is known as vimarśa form of the Brahman.

724. सर्वतन्त्रेशी
Sarva + tantra + īśvarī = She is the presiding deity of all tantra-s. This is an extension of the previous nāma. This nāma says that She is sarva (all) tantra svarupinī (form). As said in the previous nāma, tantra practice does not fructify without invoking Her, as She forms the foundation of all tantra-s. Śrī vidyā rituals can be classified under vaidīga (as per Vedic principles) as well as tantric methods.

725. दक्षिणामूर्तिरूपिणी
She is in the form of Dakśināmūrti, the Guru form of Śiva. In this form Śiva sits facing South, hence He is known as Dakṣiṇa (South) + mūrti (form). This form of Śiva is considered as Guru for Lord Brahma and Lord Viṣṇu. The great Ramana Mahariṣī explained Dakṣiṇāmūrti as Dakṣiṇa + a + mūrti. Dakṣiṇa (capable) a + mūrti (formless), which means formless teacher of knowledge, the Brahman. Dakṣiṇāmūrti’s mantra-s are widely available in tantra śāstrā-s. For mahā ṣodaśī mantra, Dakṣiṇāmūrti is the riṣi. The next two nāma-s are continuation of this nāma. Dakṣiṇāmūrti is the only form of Śiva, who taught ‘Self-realisation’. Dakṣiṇāmūrti form was taken by Śiva, after His consort burnt Herself with the fire of Self (ātma agni). After having lost His wife, He started meditating on His own Self (the Brahman) facing South. At that time Sanaka and others approached Him with a request to teach them about Self-realization. Dakṣiṇāmūrti at that time was observing silence. After knowing the quest of Sanaka, Sana, Sanatkumāra, and Sanandana (sons of Brahma, conceived in His mind) to know the Brahman, He taught them without breaking his silence. The teaching was done through cin mudra. Connecting thumb with index finger is cin mudra. These two fingers indicate Brahman and jīvan. When these fingers unite, it means the union of jīva (soul) with the Brahman. Dakṣiṇāmūrti aṣṭkam consists of ten verses authored by Ādi Śaṁkara. This is not a mere poetic composition but also conveys the principles of Self-realisation.

726. सनकादिसमाराध्या
Sanaka, Sana, Sanatkumāra, and Sanāndana are the four great sages who were initiated by Dakṣiṇāmūrti. There was a huge banyan tree under which was seated young Dakṣiṇāmūrti with his aged disciples mentioned above. The banyan tree is the symbolic manifestation of macrocosm from microcosm. From a tyny seed of banyan, a huge tree of banyan grows. This is compared to the formation of gross from subtle. Initiation takes place without any words being exchanged. They are great devotees of Lalitāmbikā. There is a reference to Sanatkumāra in Chāndogya Upaniṣad (VII.26.2) which says “The revered Sanatkumāra freed deva riṣi Nārada from all his shortcomings and led him beyond darkness. The wise say that Sanatkumāra is a man of perfect knowledge.”

727. शिवज्ञानप्रदायिनी
She imparts the knowledge of Śiva, the Ultimate. Śiva jñāna (knowledge) means the knowledge of the Brahman, which is also known as the Supreme knowledge. To know Śiva, one should first know His Śaktī, who alone is capable of leading a person to the Brahman or Śiva. Rāmāyaṇa says ‘wind can be realized through movements, fire can be realised through heat and Śiva can be realized only through Śaktī.’ It can also be said that Śiva is the source of knowledge for Her. It is said śaṁkaraṁ caitanyam which means that Śiva is both jñāna and kriyā. He is the sovereign, pure free will in knowledge and action. Based upon this principle, Śiva Sūtra-s opens by saying caitanyamātmā. Caitanyam means consciousness of the highest purity and knowledge. There is no difference between Brahman and the highest form of consciousness. But how Śaktī alone is capable of unravelling Śiva? This is answered by Śiva Sūtra (I.6) again which says that by meditating on Śaktī, the universe disappears as a separate entity thereby unveiling Self illuminating Śiva. The process of such happening is described in Spanda Kārikā (I.8) (another treatise of Kashmiri Saivism) which says ‘the empirical individual cannot ward off the urge of desires. But entering the energetic circle of the Self (Śiva), he becomes equal to that Self.’ The seeker of Śiva becomes Śiva himself. This is known as Śiva jñāna and She imparts this kind of Supreme knowledge. It is also said that Śiva cannot be attained without first realising Śaktī. She alone can lead one to Śiva. Śiva is inaccessible directly. Unless She chooses to impart the required Supreme knowledge, none can realise Śiva. Hence, She is called Śiva-jñāna-pradāyinī.

728. चित्कला
Cit is foundational consciousness, the Brahman and kala means the power of consciousness that causes limitation in respect of activities (existence). If Cit is the Brahman, kalā (कला) is the power of divine. Kāla (काल) is different from kalā. Kāla means time. Śaktī is known as kalā as She is the power of Cit or the Brahman endowed with total freedom. Kalā power of Śaktī is slightly lower than the power of Her māyā. Kala forms one of the five coverings of māyā. Spanda Kārika (III.13) says “Being deprived of his glory by kalā, the individual becomes a victim of the group of powers arising from the multitude of words, and thus he is known as the bound one.” Kalā plays a major role in reducing the omnipotence of Śiva in an individual. Brahman has got five important powers. They are cit (consciousness), ānanda (bliss), icchā (will), jñāna (knowledge) and kriyā (action). This Cit or Śiva (first person) betakes Himself into human (third person) and Śaktī (second person). Because cit is covered by many minute barricades and sheaths, we are unable to realize Him with ease. Knowledge makes us to understand these blockades and coverings, so that it becomes easier for us to remove them and move towards Him. Brahman is safely hidden amidst these covers. Kṛṣṇa says, (Bhagavad Gīta XV.7) “The eternal jīvātma (soul) in this body is a particle of my own being.” This nāma refers to the power of the Divine in a human being. Her presence in our body is known as cit-kalā.

729. आनन्दकलिका
She is in the form of bliss basked by humans. This bliss is attained when the sheaths and barricades mentioned in the previous nāma are removed with the aid of knowledge. Ānanda means bliss and kalikā refers to a bud. This is a stage where bliss is about to be enjoyed. The bliss in this stage is in the form of a bud that is about to blossom. The previous nāma discussed about kalā, the first among the five important powers of the divine. The next power is bliss. Brahman alone shines as ānanda, and cit (bliss and consciousness) in conjunction with icchā, jñāna and kriyā śaktī-s prevails in man. Bliss is not a mere happiness. Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II.8) explains bliss in an elaborate manner. It multiplies several types of happiness by one hundred and finally says that happiness of prajāpati (divinity presiding over procreation, protector of life) multiplied by one hundred times gives the happiness of (Lord of creatures, the Brahman, the Ultimate). Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad also explains bliss (IV.iii.32) thus: “This is the supreme attainment, this is its supreme glory, this is its highest world and this is its supreme bliss. On a particle of this very bliss, other beings live.” This nāma implies, that by establishing a divine link (devotion) with Her, She makes one realize the bliss at the right time to ultimately merge with Śiva.

730. प्रेमरूपा
Prema means love. She is the embodiment of love, the quality of being the Supreme Mother (Śrī Mātā). She emanates love.

731. प्रियङ्करी
Because of being an embodiment of love, She causes love in humans. The cause of love is emanation, discussed in the previous nāma. Emanation is not possible if the source of emanation is not embodied with what is emanated. Sun cannot give light unless He is full of light. It can also be said that She gives what is loved by humans. There are only two things that humans can love. One is salvation and another is material prosperity. She gives either one of them depending upon what is sought for. A man with knowledge asks for liberation and an ignorant man asks for material gains.

732. नामपारायणप्रीता
Pārāyaṇa means repetition. This nāma could mean that She is fond of repeated recitation of Lalitā Sahasranāma. This can be inferred from the words of Lalitāmbikā when She asks Vāc Devi-s to compose and recite a verse in Her praise to Her liking. When Vāc Devi-s completed the recitation of this Sahasranāma, Lalitāmbikā was immensely pleased and extolled them. The benefits of such recitations are given in uttara bhāg or the concluding chapter of this Sahasranāma. From a (अ) to kṣa (क्ष) are Her names. They are known as mātṛkā that are infused with tattva-s or principles. Please refer nāma 577 mātṛkā varṇa rūpiṇī. From ka to kṣa there are thirty five (consonants) letters and the first letter a (first vowel) is the 36th . Multiplying this 36 with 16 vowels, we get 576 and again this 576 is multiplied by 36, we get 20,736. Add with this the first letter अ, 20737 is arrived at. There are 20,737 combinations of letters that should be recited in either in a day, a week, a month, in six months (ayana) or in a year. This recitation is also called pārāyaṇa. She is fond of this pārāyaṇa as well. This is known as ghaṭikā pārāyaṇa.

733. नन्दिविद्या
She is worshipped by Nandi. There are twelve main riṣi-s for Śrī vidyā (refer nāma 238). Apart from them, there are few more riṣi-s and Nandi is one among them. There is no specific information available whether this Nandi is the vehicle of Śiva or a sage. The great Tamil sage Tirumūlar addresses Śiva as Nandi. Śiva is also one of the riṣi-s of Pañcadaśī mantra. Generally Pañcadaśī mantra is initiated with Ānanda Bhairava as riṣi.

734. नटेश्वरी
Śiva is a great dancer and known as Natarājā. His wife is Nateśvari. Saundarya Laharī (verse 41) describes this dance as nava rasa mahā tāṇḍava naṭam which means the great dance with nine types of rasa-s (nine types of expressions). This probably means Śiva, as the dance by a man is known a tāṇḍava and dance by a woman is known as nāṭya. In this context, She is referred to as the consort of Śiva. Following are certain sounds generated when Śiva performs ānanda tāṇḍava: (source: Śiva tāṇḍava ilakkaṇaṁ - an ancient Tamil Scripture) Janda dugu dugudugudugu dugugudu dugudugu dumakiṭa kiṭadaga jaṇuda jaṇuda dagī jaṇuda jaṇuda daga jagaṇaṁ jaridaga jaguṇam naganaga

735. मिथ्याजगदधिष्ठाना
She is the cause for the illusionary universe, the effect of māyā. Śrīmad Bhāgavata opens by saying “We meditate on the transcendental reality from which the universe springs up ......in whom this threefold creation (three guṇa-s – sattva, rajas and tamas) though unreal, appears as real.” The cause for the illusionary universe is explained in Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (IV.iv.19) which says “Through the mind alone It (the Brahman) is to be realized. There is no diversity, whatsoever in It. He goes from death to death, who sees difference as it were in It.” The illusion or duality is the superimposition of ignorance. Mithyā means false or incorrect, jagad means universe and adhiṣṭānā means support or basis. This nāma means that She is the basis for false appearance of the universe or She supports this delusive (illusionary) universe with the power of Her māyā. There is another theory for this nāma. Universe is the manifestation of the Brahman. When Brahman is real, the universe also is bound to be real. A pot is made of clay, hence clay and pot are not different. In the same way, the Brahman and universe are not different. They are one. Though they are the same, because of illusion they appear as different. The illusion becomes a reality here. This is the argument of Vedānta. Suppose the illusion itself is considered as illusory then the universe and the Brahman become different. This argument countermines the theory of Vedānta. In this case, the illusion itself becomes illusionary. Pot and clay are considered as different and the cause for the pot, the clay is ignored. The cause for the universe, the Brahman is ignored as illusion binds a person with visible objects.

736. मुक्तिदा
Mukti means salvation. She offers liberation to those who are worthy of it. Liberation is subject to law of karma. She will not offer liberation by overruling the law of karma. But salvation can be offered only by Her, as She alone is capable of taking a person to Śiva (refer nāma 727). The next nāma explains further.

737. मुक्तिरूपिणी
She is in the form of liberation. Acquiring knowledge alone does not give salvation, though it is a prerequisite. The happiness (bliss) attained with knowledge gives liberation. This is known as kaivalya, the fifth stage (refer nāma 625. kaivalya pada dāyinī). Kaivalya is the term used by sāṁkhya yoga and mokṣa or mukti is the term used by advaitin-s. When ignorance is removed by acquiring knowledge, one is getting rid of bondage. This does not mean liberation. Liberation happens during eternal bliss, the perpetual happiness, provided one’s karmic account is favourable. She provides liberation (the previous nāma) because, She is the embodiment of liberation. Salvation is the culmination of the process of realising the Self. Mukti or mokṣa is different from salvation or liberation. Former is a temporary shelter in higher planes and the latter is merger with the Brahman Himself with no more births. These two nāma-s can be compared to nāma-s 730 and 731.

738. लास्यप्रिया
Lāsya means dancing by women accompanied with instrumental music and singing. She is fond of such entertainments. Nāma-s 172 and 184 of Lalitā triśatī talks about Her interest in lāsya.

739. लयकरी
It is said that svara (musical note) is the father and laya is the mother. Laya is the balancing act between the primary music and the supporting music. In this context this nāma means that She does this balancing act in sustaining this universe by making the living a pleasurable one. Laya is a stage beyond meditation. It is known as interiorization of consciousness where dissolution of consciousness takes place. It is said “We bow to Śaṃkara from whose expansion and contraction of Śaktī, the world arises and dissolves.” Śiva Sūtra (III.31) says sthiti-layau which means “The universe is the expansion of His energy in objective impressions and in the dissolution of those impressions.” Therefore, laya also means mental absorption. Only in total mental absorption, the Brahman is realized. This nāma also says that She is the cause for such absorption (karī means causing).

740. लज्जा
Lajjā means bashfulness. This is considered as one of the basic qualities of women. The bīja hrīṁ is known as lajjā bīja (hrīṁ is also known as māyā bīja). It is also said that She is bashful fearing conceited rituals. Lajjā is used in nāma-s 79 and 195 in triśatī. Her true devotee is compared to a tortoise, which shrinks all its body parts within its shell. She should always be worshipped in solitude. There is difference between joint prayers and conceited rituals. For example, gurus’ birthdays are celebrated jointly by all his disciples. Community worship is another instance of joint prayer. Conceited rituals mean, invoking Her amidst pomp and vanity. She does not look into material offerings. She is concerned about what is being offered from within.

741. रम्भादिवन्दिता
She is worshipped by Rambhā, Urvaśī and other beautiful celestial damsels. Rambhā is the wife of Nala-kūbara (son of Kubera), who was carried away by Rāvaṇa. Some scriptures say that Rambhā also means Gaurī, the wife of Śiva. Possibly this nāma means Her unparalleled beauty. The next eight nāma-s discuss about Her intentions of destroying evil acts to make one realize Śiva, the Brahman. Please recall nāma 727.

742. भवदावसुधावृष्टिः
She puts out the fire of materialistic life (saṃsāra) by raining nectar. While in the path of spirituality, there is no room for pleasures associated with material life. Bhava means saṃsāra, dhāva means forest fire. Material life is compared to forest fire and She extinguishes it by rain of nectar. Forest fire is ignorance and nectar is knowledge. Ignorance is the cause for indulging in material life. Ignorance is eradicated by acquiring knowledge. This nāma could also mean that by showering on the forest, She makes the forest to grow. This means that She makes the ignorant to continue to suffer from the influence of māyā. A knowledgeable man alone is able to transcend the illusionary effects of māyā. This nāma can be split into three words as bhavadā + vasudhā + vrṣtiḥ. Bhava also means Śiva therefore bhavadā means She is the giver of Śiva. Attaining Śiva means liberation. Vasudhā means wealth. She is the giver of wealth. Vrṣtiḥ means giver. In this context this nāma means that She is the giver of both liberation and material life. It is said that dedicated and sincere devotees of Lalitāmbikā get both salvation and material pleasure.

743. पापारण्यदवानला
Pāpa means sins. She is the forest fire who blows away sins that cause miseries (refer nāma 167 Pāpa-nāśinī). Rudra Yāmala says “Indra! This supreme secret which destroys all sins immediately is to repeat Pañcadaśī mantra 1008 times by standing in water after taking bath with total devotion and faith.” Lalitā triśatī nāmas 31 and 112 convey the same meaning. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (XVIII.66) “Resigning all your duties to Me, the all powerful and all supporting Lord, take refuge in Me alone, I shall absolve you of all sins, worry not.”

744. दौर्भाग्यतूलवातूला
Karma-s accrued in various births appear like a big bundle of cotton. She blows away the contents of the bundle like whirlwind. Karma-s are the cause for miseries and this nāma says that She removes these miseries like whirlwind blowing away thistledown. This nāma does not mean that She will remove the sins that easily. She makes such sinners to perform good karma-s as a result of which the intensity of the karma-s is reduced. She is the cause for making a person to perform good karma-s to offset his evil karma-s. By not transcending the law of karma, She still shows ways to come out of committing sins and offsetting the karmic account.

745. जराध्वान्तरविप्रभा
Jarā means old age ravi means sun dhvānta means darkness and prabha means beginning to illuminate. She dispels ignorance like the sun dispelling darkness. The ignorance that is referred here is about the body. Body is different from ātman or soul. Body is subjected to decay whereas ātman is eternal. (Ātman here can refer both the soul and the Brahman. Soul may have an end whereas the Brahman has neither a beginning nor an end. In terms of Self- realisation, first one has to understand his soul and then the Brahman. For easier understanding, soul and the Brahman are referred to as two separate concepts.) If one gives importance to his body, then he is said to be ignorant. Attachment towards perishables is ignorance. Like sun dispelling darkness by his rays, She dispels ignorance of attaching importance to body, by driving away fear about old age. One develops fear of death at old age. Kṛṣṇa explains this in Bhagavad Gīta (II.22) “As a man shedding worn out garments, takes other new ones, likewise the embodied soul, casting off worn-out bodies enters into others which are new.” This nāma means that one should not attach importance to aging of the body, which is a natural phenomenon. By being devout to Her, one may not get the fear of old age and the ultimate death. Please refer nāma 851 also.

746. भाग्याब्धिचन्द्रिका
Previous nāma referred to sun and this nāma refers to moon. Sun and moon are said to be Her two eyes. She is like moon light to the ocean of fortune. Sea water raises (high tide) with waxing moon and on the full moon day tides of oceans are high. This is a poetic comparison. On seeing Her, one’s fortunes rise high.

747. भक्तचित्तकेकिघनाघना
The minds of Her devotees are compared to peacocks. Ghanāghana means rain bearing clouds (dark clouds). Peacocks dance on seeing dark rain bearing clouds. Lalitāmbikā is compared to dark clouds. On seeing Lalitāmbikā, the minds of Her devotees reach the stage of bliss. Both in the previous nāma and this nāma the context of ‘seeing’ means staying connected with Her eternally through the higher level of consciousness fixed on Her perpetually. The term ‘seeing’ is not to be interpreted literally. It is visualising Her through mind. After having denounced the importance of body, Vāc Devi-s highlight the importance of mind by these two nāma-s. The usage of ghanāghana means continuity of Her grace. There is a verse (53) in Śivānanda Lahari more or less on these lines. In this verse, Goddess Parvatī is compared to clouds, Śiva’s hair to ākaś. On seeing the clouds the peacocks cry with the sound keki. Keka means the sound that peacocks make.

748. रोगपर्वतदम्भोलिः
Roga means disease, parvata means mountain and dhambholi means thunderbolt. She is like a thunderbolt to diseases. Thunderbolt is very powerful and capable of even breaking the mountains. Thunderbolt also refers to the vajrāyudha of Lord Indra, a potent weapon that is capable of annihilating the opponents. This nāma says that She cures all the diseases of Her devotees.

749. मृत्युदारुकुठारिका
She is like an axe to the tree of death. Kaṭha Upaniṣad (I.ii.25) says ‘death overcomes everyone, yet even death is mere condiment for the Self.’ This means the fear of death that overcomes humanity is a mere condiment for the Brahman. The fear of death is the worst fear for a man. But if he has faith in Her, he does not get the fear of death. It is said that there are twenty eight types of pains in one’s life. They arise due to nescience, ego, desire, anger, attachment, etc.

750. महेश्वरी
Nāma 208 is Māheśvarī. Maheśvarā’s (Śiva) wife is Maheśvarī. This indicates Her greatness or Supreme status.

751. महाकाली
She is mahatī (nāma 774). Mahat is used to indicate anything that is supreme. This word originates from the word mahā. Both the words give the same meaning. Mahatī can be used as an independent word whereas mahā is to be used with another word. This is the origin of the nāma. Mahat also means intellect or buddhi. This is the third principle in sāṃkhya yoga, the first two being puruṣa and prakṛti. Kālī has several meanings such as blackness, Śiva’s wife, black clouds, a woman with a dark complexion, mother of sage Vyāsa. Sarasvatī is also known as Kālī, a form of Durga, etc. Mahā Kāla means Śiva and Mahā Kālī is His Śaktī. Liṅga Purāṇa (Chapter 106) says about the origin of Kālī. “Having entered the body of the lord of Deva-s, Pārvatī made Her own body out of poison in the neck of Śiva......... Śiva created Kālī, the blue necked Goddess with matted hair from His third eye.........On seeing Kālī who resembled fire and whose black neck was embellished with poison.......” This nāma also says that Lalitāmbikā is the ruler of death in the form of Mahā Kālī. God of death Yama is also black in colour. Lalitāmbikā takes black complexion when She destroys evil doers. Please refer nāma 756. {Further reading on Kālī: (as told by Śrī Kāñcī Mahā Svāmī in the book Voice of God – Volume I.) “White Śiva gets to the task of saṃhāra after taking black coloured Pārvatī as Śaktī. When we refer to Ambāl (Tamil version of Śaktī) Herself as saṃhāramūrtī, we call Her as Kālī. The very word Kālī means a woman who is black..... We do a lot of work. Then we become tired and go to sleep. This is caused by tamas. There, it is pitch dark –black only. But, it is in this sleep that man gets at least some peace. To the being who runs around the whole day and goes through hardships, Parāśaktī, as a consolation, gives them sleep every day and gives them some peace. Therefore, there appears to a lot of grace in tamas itself. Saṃhāra is a long sleep. Just as we are in a state of peace during sleep, unaffected by sorrow, in the same way the jīva that undergoes saṃhāra is immersed in peace, free from the various kinds of experiences arising out of activities, till it takes another birth. Lord Śiva performs saṃhāra in order to give us temporary rest, free from the bondage of karma. Only the jñāni-s who have lost the ego ‘I am doing karma’ can permanently escape from the cycle of karma. But, in order that even a sinner may, at least temporarily be free from the harassment of karma. Parāśaktī has, with great compassion designed saṃhāra..... The colour of Pārvatī, the Śaktī of Rudra, who performs saṃhāra is black. Only if the worldly attachements are given up, one can get released from sorrows and miseries and attain eternal peace. To be aware that we are in a state of peace and remain peaceful is the state of samādi. This is the state which is granted by Parāśaktī through Her function of grace. The next state is being in a state of sleep without the awareness that we are in a state of peace. Therefore, next to the stage of grace (anugraha), what is pleasing to all beings is only saṃhāra.}

752. महाग्रासा
She is a devourer (one who eats voraciously). This nāma says that everything merges into the Brahman. Kaṭha Upaniṣad (I.ii.25) says “the best among all people are like food to the Self. Death overcomes everyone, yet even death is a mere condiment for the Self.” Brahma Sūtra (I.ii.9) also says “The eater (the Brahman) on account of the appropriation of all that moves and does not move.” This nāma refers to the act of annihilation or the great dissolution (mahā pralaya) of the Brahman.

753. महाशना
The great eater. There is no significant difference between the previous nāma and this nāma. Possibly the earlier nāma refers to the great dissolution (the deluge) and this nāma refers to destruction. In the process of annihilation, the entire universe ceases to exist and in the case of destruction a part of the universe (evil doers) is destroyed. This nāma is different from nāma 229 mahā-sanā (महासना).

754. अपर्णा
She is without debts. When apa (negation) is prefixed to rṇā (debts) it means She is without debts. She repays the devotion of Her devotees by granting boons to them, thereby not indebted to Her devotees. She is not even indebted to Śiva because She takes care of His acts of creation, sustenance and dissolution. She is not indebted to Deva-s (gods and goddesses) because, She is saving them from the demons. She is not indebted to anyone in this universe. Bhāskararāyā (who authored Varivasyā Rahasya) was a great devotee of Lalitāmbikā. He did not have enough money to perform even small rituals to Her. He borrowed money and performed daily rituals to Her. His creditors pressurised him to return the money. He did not have any money as his only job was to worship Her. He did not have any source of income. Suddenly, the pressure from his creditors stopped. Later he found out that Lalitāmbikā personally repaid all his debts in the form of his wife. Wealth and unfeigned devotion do not go together! Aparṇa also means without leaves. It is said that She did penance for attaining Śiva without even taking leaves. Aparṇa as such means Durga or Pārvatī. According to another interpretation parṇā means falling and aparṇā means She is devoid of fall. There is no fall for the Brahman.

755. चण्डिका
She is Durga. She is said to be inaccessible because of Her anger. She is the combined form of Durga, Lakṣmī and Sarasvatī. Please refer nāma 704. Caṇḍi or Caṇḍikā does not like evil doers and becomes terribly angry on seeing them. She slays these evil doers without mercy. Her anger is expressed in Śrī Devi Māhātmyam. Taittirīya Upaniṣad (III.viii.1) says, “The wind blows out of fear for Him (the Brahman). The sun also shines out of fear. Out of fear, fire, Indra, death all rush to do their respective duties.” This clearly explains that making others fear for Him is the quality of the Brahman. Śrī Rudraṁ (I.1) opens by paying reverence to His anger. Śrī Rudraṁ says nāmasthae rudra manyava .... nāmah. Caṇḍikā form of Her is said to be ferocious. She cannot tolerate evil acts. Because of Her anger, activities of universe take place in a disciplined manner. A seven year old girl is known as Caṇḍikā

756. चण्डमुण्डासुरनिषूदिनी
Caṇḍa and Muṇḍa are the two demons who were killed by Her and hence She is known as Cāmuṇḍa (the first letters of the two demons). In Mārkaṇḍeya Purāṇa (Devi Bhāgavata) (84.25) Devi Caṇḍikā addresses Kāli thus “Because you have killed Chaṇḍa and Muṇḍa, you shall be known as Chāmuṇḍā and be famed in the world.” Caṇḍikā is different from Chāmuṇḍā. Caṇḍikā is the combined form of Durgā, Lakṣmī and Sarasvatī. Cāmuṇḍā is the form of Kālī. All these forms are only manifestations of Lalitāmbikā. Cāmuṇḍa is one of the sapta mātā-s (seven mothers). In the previous nāma it is said that She is angered on seeing evil doers. To prove this point, She destroyed two demons, who were the great evil doers.

757. क्षराक्षरात्मिका
There are two interpretations to this nāma. Kṣara means syllables and akṣara means alphabets. Syllable is formed by the combination of alphabets. This nāma means She is mono-syllable and multi-syllable. In other words, She is one as well as many. Nāma 577 is mātṛkā varṇa rūpiṇī. She is in the form all alphabets and words. She is śabda Brahman. Divine consciousness is identical with the Supreme word which is known as parā-vāc. All the alphabets and words are derived from this. Nāma 366 parā explains more on this. Devi Upaniṣad (9.6) says mantrāṇāṁ matṛkādevī śabdānāṁ jñāna rūpiṇī (मन्द्िाणाीं मतकृ ादेव शब्दानाीं ज्ञान रूवपण ) (She is in the form matṛkā-s in mantra-s and in the form of jñāna in sound. Matṛkā means source or origin. In this context it means the alphabets. The realisation of matṛkā by the soul means liberation to the soul. Soul realizes matṛkā by means of mantra, the origin of which is matṛkā or Sanskrit letters from a to kṣa (अ to क्ष). Mono-syllable means single alphabet which represents māyā or illusion and multi-syllable means jīva-s or souls. Lalitā triśatī nāma-s 22 and 23 explain this concept. Bhagavad Gīta (VIII.13) says ‘OM (ॐ) is the mono syllable’. Kaṭha Upaniṣad (I.ii.16) also says “this akṣaram (ॐ) is Brahman with attributes and this akṣaram is Brahman without attributes.” Either way, this nāma means that She is the Brahman. Viṣṇu Sahasranāmama nāma 480 is Kṣara and 481 is akṣara. Kṣara also means perishables and akṣara means non-perishables. Bhagavad Gīta (VIII.4) says kṣaro bhāvaḥ which means all perishable objects. Kṛṣṇa further says (Bhagavad Gīta XV.16) that perishables mean the body and non-perishable means soul. In this way, this nāma means that She is the cause for both body and soul (the Supreme Creator. Both body and soul is necessary to unfold the karmic effects).

758. सर्वलोकेशी
She is Īśvarī for all the worlds. She rules all the worlds. Gāyatri mantra refers to seven worlds and each world is represented by one vyāhṛti. (bhūr, bhuvar, svar, mahar, janar, tapar, satya). These worlds represent the level of consciousness and She rules over all these mental planes. In other words, she rules over the universe. Satya is the highest level of consciousness. Satya also refers to the upper most of the seven worlds, the abode of Brahmā and the heaven of Truth.

759. विश्वधारिणी
She holds the universe. Viśva means the universe and dhāriṇī means holding.

760. त्रिवर्गदात्री
Tri-varga means puruṣārtha-s. She is the giver of puruṣārtha-s. Puruṣārtha-s are dharma (righteousness), artha (wealth or purpose), kāma (desire) and mokṣa (liberation). The last one, mokṣa is not included here, hence instead of puruṣārtha-s, the nāma only says tri-varga. Her act of liberating a soul was discussed in nāma 736. All the four puruṣārtha-s are discussed in nāma 291. puruṣārthapradā. Tri-varga is also known as trayīmaya, intent only upon the three objects of man, dharma, artha and kāma.

761. सुभगा
Five year old girl is known subhaga. Among others, bhaga also means sun, Goddess Sāvitrī, good fortune, welfare, prosperity, dignity etc. Su is used an adjective to the word bhaga. It means She is the incarnation of good fortunes of the highest order. She has dignity of the highest order. If bhaga is interpreted as sun, then it means that sun shines due to Her. Sun derives energy from Her to shine and sustain the universe (the galaxy known to us). Please refer nāma-s 275 and 715 which further explain on this. Subhaha (सगभग) means possessing good fortune, very fortunate or prosperous, lucky, happy, blessed, highly favoured, beautiful, lovely, charming, pleasing, etc. In this context it means that She is the possessor of all such auspicious qualities. (The very thought of Her is capable of conveying all auspiciousness.)

762. त्र्यम्बका
She has three eyes. Sun, moon and fire are Her three eyes (Please recall iḍā, piṅgala and suṣumna of kuṇḍalinī). This nāma also means that She is the mother of Brahma, Viṣṇu and Rudra. Please refer nāma-s 453 and 477.

763. त्रिगुणात्मिका
Guṇa or qualities are of three types, sattvic, rajas and tamas. (Please refer nāma 984. triguṇā. Guṇa-s belong to prakṛti (nature) and is the cause of opposites. Puruṣa (soul) in association with prakṛti endowed with three guṇa-s cause creation. Guṇa-s belong to Her when She acts as Brahman with attributes. When She is the Brahman without attributes (nirguṇa Brahman) She is nirguṇa (nāma 139) and gunātītā (nāma 931).

764. स्वर्गापवर्गदा
She gives svarga or heaven and liberation. Svarga or heaven is a respite for the soul, if the soul is embedded with good karmic account. Apart from pains or pleasures through the gross forms that souls manifest, they have to undergo pains and pleasures in hell or heaven. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (IX.21) “Having enjoyed the extensive heaven world, they return to this world of mortals on the stock of their merits being exhausted.” Svarga is heaven and apavarga means liberation, the emancipation of the soul from bodily existence, exempted from further transmigration also known as mokṣa. Liberation is of two types. One is jīvanmukti which means he attains liberation when he is alive. Another is videhamukti which means liberation after death. Both these liberations can be attained only through knowledge. A jīvanmukta, however may still posses subtle hidden seeds of past actions that have not been totally destroyed by the fires of the wisdom. Some of them destroy these remnants of past material karma by certain work in the astral cosmos. [For further reading: It is said that souls take strange forms in heaven or hell. It is also explained that such forms do not have mouths to eat and drink. They feed themselves through their nose. It is also said that they are fond of smell arising from roasting sesame seeds (It is known as til seeds or sesamum indicum). Annual ceremonial rites for ancestors are performed to appease the souls of the ancestors. During such rituals, sesame seeds are used to invoke the souls.)

765. शुद्धा
She is pure. She is the embodiment of purity. Purity gives knowledge, that is required to attain liberation, discussed in the previous nāma. Stains are called as ignorance. She is devoid of any stains.

766. जपापुष्पनिभाकृतिः
Japā-puṣpa means hibiscus flower. She has the complexion of hibiscus flower (deep red or crimson) is mentioned in dhyāna verse.

767. ओजोवती
Ojas means body vitality, the principle of vital warmth and action throughout the body. Ojas is said to be the eighth substance of a body. This is a sentient life energy prevailing in the spinal cord. This is the combination of five cognitive senses known as jñānendriya. Whatever is consumed, food or perceptions first get transformed into ojas in the spinal cord. Ayurveda says that there are seven dhātu-s (ingredients) in the body. They are chyle (lymphatic fluid), blood, flesh, fat, bone, marrow and fluids of procreation (Some say ten by adding hair and skin). Ojas is said to be the eighth dhātu. Ayurveda classifies ojas as parā-ojas and aparā -ojas. Again there are two different interpretations as to its location and quantity. Apart from what is detailed above, it is said that quantity of ojas is equal to half of the volume when both the palms are joined together in the little finger areas. The other theory says that ojas which is the substratum of life is of eight drops only in quantity and is located in the heart. But it is accepted that there is no life possible without ojas. It marks the beginning of the formation of the embryo. It is also said that ‘it is this ojas where the soul is lodged after the union of sperm and ovum’ (Charaka Samhita XXX.9). This clearly explains the importance of Śaktī in human life. She is in the form of ojas. This also affirms that She resides in the heart.

768. द्युतिधरा
She radiates brilliantly. This illumination is due to initial and final stages of “I” consciousness. This I consciousness is known as aham in Sanskrit. Aham is the comprehension of the entire cosmos, which is the expression of the creative brilliance of Śaktī.

769. यज्ञरूपा
Viṣṇu is the Supreme authority for yajña-s. Yajña means fire ritual where oblations are offered with mantra recitations. Agni, the lord of fire is the carrier of oblations to the concerned deities. Yajur Veda says Yajño vai Viṣṇuḥ which means yajña is Viṣṇu (vai means certainly, the stressing factor. This is rarely used in Rig Veda and often used in Atharva Veda). The purpose of yajña is sacrifice. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (X.25) “among yajña-s I am japa yajña” (super conscious chanting of mantra-s is japa). Viṣṇu Sahasranāma nāma 445 is yajñaḥ. Based on the above information, it is said that She is in the form of Viṣṇu. Going by the Vedic interpretations, yajña means devotion. Vedic literature says that yajña means oblations or offerings. She is the most devoted or She is made up of sacrifices, because most sacrifices are done in Her favour (Śaktī worship and tantric rituals). It is said that the greatest form sacrifice is worshipping one’s own self.

770. प्रियव्रता
She is fond of vows. Vows mean refraining from certain acts through saṃkalpa or determination. Mostly such vows are done for appeasing gods and goddesses. She is also pleased with vows made to other gods and goddesses. She is pleased on account of two reasons. The first point is that She is the Brahman (both nirguṇa and saguṇa). Second aspect is that the entire universe is the manifested form of Śiva and Śaktī (puruṣa and prakṛti). Kṛṣṇa also says in Bhagavad Gīta (VII.21) “Whatever divine form a devotee chooses to worship with reverence, I stabilise the faith of that particular devotee in that very form.”

771. दुराराध्या
She is difficult to attain. The process of attaining Her is difficult, as mind control is paramount in Her worship. Worshipping Her without controlling mind and senses, does not yield any result. Saundarya Laharī (verse 95) says “It is difficult for those who cannot control their senses, to come near your sacred feet and worship you.” Refer nāma 871, which endorses this point.

772. दुराधर्षा
She cannot be controlled. She can be controlled only by unstained devotion. Pretentious worship is not liked by Her. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (IX.26) “Whosoever offers to me with love a leaf, a flower, a fruit or water, (patraṁ, puṣpaṁ, phalṁ, toyaṁ) I appear in person before that disinterested devotee of sinless mind and delightfully partake of that article offered by him with love.” She should be worshipped in seclusion. This aspect has been repeatedly stressed through various nāma-s in this Sahasranāma and elsewhere. ‘The bliss of atman is Lalitai’ says Bhāvanopaniṣad 29. Sage Durvāsa in his Śrī śaktīmahimnḥ stotraṁ (verse 53) says that one who worships Her through prāṇāyāma and meditation becomes one with Lalitāmbikā.

773. पाटलीकुसुमप्रिया
Pāṭalī (Bignonia Suaveolens) is red and white flower. Red represents Śaktī and white represents Śiva and hence this flower is said to represent both Śiva and Śaktī. Śiva is fond of bilva tree and Śaktī is fond of pāṭalī tree.

774. महती
This nāma declares one of the important attributes of Brahman. Mahat arises from the union of puruṣa (soul) prakṛti (nature). Mahat is the second principle from prakṛti as per Sāṃkhya philosophy. Puruṣa is the self-intelligent subject and prakṛti is the non-intelligent potential cause of the objective universe. Puruṣa-s are innumerable in number, whereas prakṛti is one. The primal constituents of prakṛti are the three guṇa-s (sattva, rajas and tamas). As per sāṃkhya yoga principle all objects both physical and psychical are transformation of prakṛti, the first of which is mahat. She is addressed as mahat by Vāc Devi-s because She manifests in all living beings as She is also known as prakṛti. Mahat is also known as buddhi or intellect, the great and exclusive principle of humanity. Intellect is an essential component for attaining knowledge. Mahānārāyaṇa Upaniṣad (I.i.1) says ‘mahato mahīyān (महतो महरयान ्) which means greater than the greatest. This nāma says She is that Mahat. Without mahat (intellect or the principal factor of underlying self-consciousness) Śiva cannot be realized, hence it is said that Śiva can be realized only with the blessings of Śaktī.

775. मेरुनिलया
She lives atop Meru. Meru is a fabulous mountain regarded as the Olympus of Hindu mythology and said to form the central point of Jambu-dvīpa. Meru has already been discussed in nāma 55 sumeru madhya śṛṅgasthā. Three dimensional form of Śrī Cakra is known as Meru or Mahā Meru. Meru also means the condensed form of Pañcadaśī mantra. There are only nine bīja-s, if repeated bīja-s are removed (The nine bīja-s are: ka, e, ī, la, sa, ha, ra, ma (क, ए, ई, ल, स, ह, र, म) and bindu). Meru also means the spinal cord. She traverses up and down the spinal cord in Her subtlest form kuṇḍalinī. This nāma could also mean Her movements through meru (spinal cord).

776. मन्दारकुसुमप्रिया
She is fond of mandāra flowers (Erythrina Indica). Mandāra tree is one of the five trees in Svarga (heaven). There is a hermitage on the banks of river Ganges where there are eleven sacred pools. She is fond of this hermitage. Mandāra flowers are also referred in Buddhism. When Buddha was preaching, it is said that mandāra flowers used to shower from heaven.

777. वीराराध्या
Vīrā-s mean warriors. Characteristics of vīrā are defined. He should have realized the Self, devoid of ego, opposed to dyads and should be brave as well. In this context vīrā means courageous devotee. When one realizes Self, he need not be afraid of anyone. She is worshipped by such warriors.

778. विराड्रूपा
The concept has been already discussed in nāma 256. viśva-rūpa. In addition to what has been discussed there, virāḍ can also be explained as follows. Virāḍ is the consciousness which identifies itself with the individual gross body in the waking state. Consciousness can be broadly classified into microcosm and macrocosm. Microcosm is the individual consciousness and macrocosm is the universal consciousness. These can also be interpreted as the individual self and the cosmic Self. Microcosm or the individual cosmology is a miniscule of macrocosm or the sum total of all microcosms. The individual self has four states of consciousness. 1. Turya or avyakta (for avyakta refer nāma 398), 2. Īśvarā (nāma 271 Īśvarī), 3. Hiraṇyagarbha (this has been discussed in various nāma-s in this Sahasranāma. Please refer nāma 638 svarṇagarbhā ) and 4. Virāḍ. Virāḍ is also known as virāj. It is also known as vaiśvānara. The last of the above mentioned four states of consciousness is the all pervading metamorphosis of the divine being. It is the omnipresent universal form, encompassing the entire visible and tangible phenomenal world. This is the fully manifested macrocosm that appear to the human eyes as the universe. What we perceive is not the complete macrocosm, but only a minuscule deluded by māyā or illusion. Virāḍ is the end product of the macrocosm within a fully developed universe that is realized from experiment and observation rather than theory. Pañcikaraṇam, a small treatise on advaita philosophy by Śaṃkarācārya says. “The virāḍ is said to be the aggregate of all the quintuplicate elements and their effects” (verse 1). Those subtle elements produced the gross ones, from which again the virāṭ (the macrocosm) or the objective totality comes into existence.” Again verse 11 says, “The gross elements are compounded. These produce, the sum total of all the gross bodies. This is the gross body of the disembodied Ātman.” Virāṭ, virāj and virāḍ are the same.

779. विरजा
Vi means without and rajas means impurity. She is without impurity. Mahānārāyaṇa Upaniṣad (65.1) says ahaṁ virajā vipāpmā which means ‘I am freed from sins and passions’. The devotee offers fire oblations seeking purity in his breath, gross body, etc. There is a fire ritual by name virajahoma to be performed before becoming a sanyāsī. When one becomes devoid of impurity, he becomes one with the Brahman. She, the Brahman, is devoid of impurity. She is pure (refer nāma 765). When one wants to merge with the Brahman, one should possess the qualities of the Brahman.

780. विश्वतोमुखी
She has faces in all directions. Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (III.3) says, viśvatomukhaḥ which means ‘all faces are His’. Faces of entire living beings are His. This nāma affirms the omnipresent nature of the Brahman. Kṛṣṇa also says in Bhagavad Gīta (IX.15) “others worship me in my universal form in many ways taking me as manifested in diverse celestial forms (viśvatomukhaṁ).” Puruṣasūkta opens by saying sahasraśīrṣā puruṣaḥ meaning that He has thousands of heads. Heads of the entire living beings are His own. This nāma means that She resides in the entire living beings of this universe, an affirmation of Her omnipresence.

781. प्रत्यग्रूपा
She is visible to those who see inwardly. She can be realized only within and this is known as Self-realization. By disconnecting mind from sensory afflictions and looking within, She is realized. Kaṭha Upaniṣad (II.i.1) explains this. “The Self-created Lord has created the sense organs with the inherent defect that are by nature outgoing. Which is why, beings see things outside and cannot see the Self within.” It says, pratyagātmānamaikṣat. Nārāyaṇa sūktaṁ (5) says antarbahiśca tatsarvaṁ vyāpya nārāyaṇa-stithaḥ (अन्द्तबुदहश्च तत्सविं ्या्य नारायण-स्स्तथः) meaning Nārāyaṇa pervades internally and externally. Why should one look within when the Brahman is omnipresent. Afterall, Nārāyaṇa pervades internally and externally. Kaṭha Upaniṣad (II.iii.9) answers this. “The Brahman is not an object of our vision. No one can see Him by his eyes. He reveals Himself, only when the mind is pure and constantly thinks of Him.”

782. पराकाशा
She is the supreme ākaś or ether or space. Parākāśa is often used to mean the Brahman. This is due to three factors. First the vast stretch of ether and secondly its purity, thirdly its imperceptibleness and finally its subtle nature. Both shine and rain come from ākaś. These are the reasons for comparing ākaś to the Brahman. Since She is the Brahman, She is compared to ākaś. When one is not able to comprehend subtle matters, normally a comparison is made to known things. Since the Brahman is the subtlest of all, a comparison is made to ether or ākaś. Brahma sūtra (I.i.22) says ākāś tat lingāt. This means that ākaś is the Brahman owing to the indicatory mark of that. The indicatory mark is explained in Chāndogya Upaniṣad (I.ix.1). It says ‘End of this earth is space, as everything arises from space and also goes back into space. Space is superior to everything. Space is the highest goal.” The Upaniṣad again says (VIII.xiv) ‘That which is described as space manifests names and forms. These names and forms are within Brahman.” Taittirīya Upaniṣad says that Brahman is bliss (III.vi) “Bhṛgu (a great sage) came to know that bliss is Brahman, for it is from bliss that these beings are born. Having been born, they are supported by bliss and when they perish, they go back to bliss. It is Varuṇa who taught this Truth. This Truth is in the empty space of the heart.” The point driven home by the Upaniṣads is that Brahman is vast empty space. Kaṭha Upaniṣad also confirms this by saying (II.ii.2) “The Self is everywhere......It supports everything and is the air in the space between the earth and heaven.” This nāma says in a single word the teachings of these Upaniṣads. Lalitā Sahasranāma is in mantra form. Hence it is said that this should not be recited like musical notes (rāga and svara) or with any musical instruments. Veda-s should never be recited in notes form or accompanied by musical instruments.

783. प्राणदा
She is the giver of vital breath or prāṇa. Her subtle form continues to be discussed. Like ākāś, prāṇa also is subtle. Like ākāś, prāṇa is also life giving. Sun and rain come from ākāś that are under Her control. Prāṇa also is controlled by Her. The omnipresent nature of the Brahman is being explained by Vāc Devi-s. The next Brahma Sutra (I.i.23) says “On that very ground, prāṇa is Brahman”. Chāndogya Upaniṣad also says (I.xi.5) says “In prāṇa all things that we see around us disappear. And at the time of appearance they appear from prāṇa.” Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (IV.iv.18) says “those who have known the prāṇa of prāṇa” which means subtle of the subtlest, the Brahman, because ‘Self is taintless and beyond the subtle ether.’ (IV.iv.20)

784. प्राणरूपिणी
This is in confirmation of the previous nāma. The previous nāma said that She is the giver of prāṇa and this nāma says that She is the embodiment of prāṇa. Unless something is overflowing, it cannot be shared. She cannot be the giver of prāṇa unless She is full of prāṇa and prāṇa overflows from Her. These types of nāma-s are available in plenty in this Sahasranāma. For example nāma-s 736 muktidā and 737 muktirūpiṇī. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (IV.x.5) explains these nāma-s (782-784). “‘I know that prāṇa is Brahman. But I do not know that ka-क and khaख are Brahman.’ The fire replies ka is kha and kha is ka (meaning both are same) and taught him that Brahman is both prāṇa and ākāś.” This teaching of Agni goes to prove that Brahman is everything. ka and kha are only taken as examples. For example Mr. A and Mr. B are the same. Both of them are Brahman. If Mr. A realises this fact, he is known as knowledgeable and Self-realized. If B does not understand this, then he is called ignorant.

785. मार्ताण्डभैरवाराध्या
She is worshipped by Mārtāṇḍa-bhairava. He is posited in the twenty fourth prahāra (wall) of Śrī puraṁ. Śrī Cakra is in the centre of this Śrī puraṁ. Anything associated with Her is prefixed with Śrī, a sign of auspiciousness. Some are of the opinion that Mārthaṇda-bhairava is the sun. Sage Durvāsa says that he worships him with his wife Chāya Devi. Sun’s wife is Chāya Devi. Then this nāma means that She is worshipped by sun. Others are of the opinion that Bhairava here means Vaṭuka Bhairava-s who are also great devotees of Her. They are also posited in Śrī puraṁ and constantly meditate on Her. There are sixty four Bhairava-s and Mārtāṇḍa-bhairava is one among them. These sixty four Bhairava-s are grouped under eight categories and each category is headed by one Bhairava and these eight Bhairava-s are called Aṣṭāṅga Bhairava-s. Mārthaṇdabhairava comes under the first group headed by Asitāṅga Bhairava Bhairava means Śiva. Śiva Sūtra (I.5) says udyamao Bhairavaḥ which means ‘sudden realization like a flash is Śiva’. Realisation always happens suddenly. It is like a flash of light. When the light is not switched on, the place remains in darkness. Once the light is switched on, the room is flooded with light. Realisation also happens this way. We go on acquiring knowledge and we know that Brahman is present everywhere. This is only assumption and presumption. But, realisation is different. Realisation is understanding and personally experiencing the Truth. Truth means everything is Brahman. In this nāma mārthaṇda refers to the flash of light. Therefore, in this context Mārtāṇḍa-bhairava means Śiva. The one who has realized Śiva and merges with Him is also known as Śiva. She is worshipped by such devotees. {Further reading of Bhairava: There are different interpretations on Bhairava. Śiva is worshiped in twenty five forms as per āgama śāstra. The important ones are Liṇgotbhava, Ardhanārīśvara, Somaskanta, Dakṣiṇāmūrti, Kālasaṁhāra, Sarabeśvarā, Nīlakanṭa, Bhairava, Riśabhārūḍha, Candraśekara, Naṭarāja and Gangādhara. Out of the twenty forms of Śiva, Bhairava form is considered to be important. Ābhatuthtārana, Vaduga, Kṣetrapāla, Brahmasiraccheta are said to be the other names of Bhairava. There is another school of thought which says that Śiva Himself crated Bhairava. There was one demon by name Dahurāsuraṇ who got a boon that he could be killed only by a woman. Kālī was created by Śaktī to kill him. The wrath of Kālī killed the demon. After killing the demon, her wrath metamorphosed as a child. Kālī fed the child with her milk. Śiva made both Kālī and the child to merge with Him. From this merged form of Śiva, Bhairva appeared in his eight forms (aṣṭa Bhairava-s). Since Bhairava was thus created by Śiva, he is said to be one of the sons of Śiva, others being Gaṇeśa, Kārttikeya, Ayyanār (said to be the God of villages) and Vīrabhatra. Bhairava is the ultimate form of manifestation or pure I consciousness. This form is called Mahā Bhairava or Śiva, the Supreme. Others give Him terrifying forms. The word Bhairava originates from the word bhīru, which means fearful. Bhairava means terribly fearful form. The right interpretation is that He protects His devotees from dreadful enemies, greed, lust and anger. Bhairava protects His devotees from these enemies. These enemies are dangerous as they never allow us seek Him within. There is also another interpretation. Bha means creation, ra means sustenance and va means destruction. Therefore Bhairava is the one who creates, sustains and dissolves the three stages of a life. Therefore, He becomes the Ultimate or the Supreme. Bhairava is also called the protector. If Bhairava is manifested as a form of Śiva, He becomes the protector of the universe. In all the temples, there will be a Bhairava idol. This Bhairava is the protector of temples. In Śiva temples, when the temple is closed, the keys are placed before Bhairava. In some of the ancient texts, Bhairava is described as the protector of women. He is described as the protector of the timid and in general women are timid in nature, hence this description. Purāṇa-s too give different versions of Bhairava. Brahma is the lord of creation. He thought that He is the Supreme and abused Śiva. Śiva created Bhairava who removed one of the five heads of Brahma and took away his skull. There is yet another version. There was a war between gods and demons. To eradicate the demons, Śiva created Śiva from whom aṣṭa Bhairava-s were created. These aṣṭa Bhairava-s got married to aṣṭa mātā-s. These aṣṭa Bhairava-s and mātā-s have dreadful forms. From these aṣṭa Bhairava-s and aṣṭa mātā-s, 64 Bhairava-s and 64 yogini-s were created. There are eight types of Bhairava-s and they are called aṣṭa Bhairava-s. They are Mahā-Bhairava, Saṃhāra-Bhairava, Asitāṅga-Bhairava, Ruru-Bhairava, Kāla-Bhairava, KrodhaBhairava, Tāmracūḍa-Bhairava, or Kapāla-Bhairava, CandracūḍaBhairava or Rudra-bhairava. Apart from these eight forms there is yet another form called Svarṇākarṣṇa Bhairava. Mahā-Bhairava is said to be Śiva himself. Normally in Śiva temples idols of Bhairava are situated in the north facing, southern direction. He is also called Kṣetrapāla. He appears in a standing position with four hands. His weapons are drum, pāśa (noose), trident and skull. In some forms of Bhairava, there are more than four hands. He appears without dress and with a dog. His weapons, dog, protruding teeth, terrifying looks, garland with red flowers all these give him frightening appearance. In all Śiva temples, regular pūja rituals begin with Sun and end with Bhairava. Bhairava likes ghee bath (abhiṣeka), red flowers, ghee lamp, unbroken coconut, honey, boiled food, fibrous fruits etc. If a Bhairava idol is facing west, it is good; facing south is moderate; facing east is not good. The right time to pray to Bhairava is midnight. During midnight it is said that Bhairava and His consort Bhairavī (nāma 276) are together and will give darśana to their devotees. The most appropriate time is Friday midnight. There are eight types of flowers and leaves used in arcana (अचुन) to Bhairava. The eight Bhairava-s are said to represent five elements viz. ākāś, air, fire, water and earth and other three being sun, moon and ātman. Each of the eight Bhairava-s are different in appearance, have different weapons, different vāhana-s and they bless their devotees with eight types of wealth representing aṣṭa Lakṣmi-s. Continuous worship of Bhairava leads the worshipper to a true Guru. There are separate dhyāna verses and mūla mantra-s to all the eight Bhairavas. Apart from the aṣṭa Bhairava-s there is one more important Bhairava called Svarṇākarṣṇa Bhairava. He has red complexion and clothed in golden dress. He has moon in his head. He has four hands. In one of the hands he carries a golden vessel. He gives wealth and prosperity. Performing pūja on Tuesdays gives quick results. Ākāśa Bhairava is also known as Sarabheśvara. In some of the ancient texts he is said to have thirty two hands, shape of a bird, golden complexion, terrible teeth, and human form above the hip. Worshipping him destroys enemies. It is generally believed that worshipping Bhairava gives prosperity, success and good progeny, prevents premature death and solution to debts and liabilities. Different forms of Bhairava evolve only from Śiva, who is called the Mahā Bhairava.}

786. मन्त्रिणीन्यस्तराज्यधूः
She has entrusted the ministerial responsibilities of the universe to Mantriṇī. Mantriṇī is feminine gender for minister. Her minister is Śyāmalā. There is already a reference to Mantriṇī in nāma-s 69 and 75. Śyāmalā is also known as Rāja-Mātaṅgī and Rāja-Śyāmalā. It is also said that one who worships Her through mantra-s is known as mantriṇī. Here mantra-s do not mean Pañcadaśī and ṣodaśī alone. They are mantra-s of the highest order. Since She is mātṛkā varṇa rūpiṇī (nāma 577), all the alphabets belong to Her. All the letters originate from Her. Therefore, there is no distinction between Her and mantra-s. This is confirmed by nāma 204. sarva mantra svarūpiṇī. Mantra is defined as ‘power in the form of formulated and expressed thought.’ This power is known as Śaktī. Mantra-s are useful only if the deeper meaning of the mantra-s is understood. Mantra-s in combination with meditation give quicker results. Japa mantra-s do not fructify unless one understands the significance of mantra-s. Mantra-s are nothing but bījākṣara (combination of alphabets). A bīja is a monosyllabic sound that contains one or more consonants with a vowel and ends with a bindu. Vāmakeśvara Tantra (refer nāma-s 351 and 945) elaborates on mantra-s. Śiva Sūtra (II.1) says Cittam mantraḥ (गचत्तम ् मन्द्िः). Cittam means limitation of the highest consciousness in the individual self. This can also be interpreted as the limitation of the Supreme Consciousness (the Brahman) in self (an individual). After having said that mind is mantra, the next sūtra (II.2) says that continuous effort leads to attainment (mantra siddhi or fructification mantra). The third sūtra (II.3) says the fructification mantra-s mean nondualism or Oneness with the Brahman (Realisation). Mantra is nothing but a secret tool in the hands of a practitioner that first enables him to establish a link with the Brahman and ultimately making him to dissolve into the Brahman. When mind and mantra are well connected, one realises the Brahman. This nāma also means that She is in the form such intricate and potent mantra-s. She is the sum total of all mantra-s.

787. त्रिपुरेशी
Śiva had burnt Tripura, a place of asura-s (demons) fortified with gold, silver and iron forts. These are nothing but stages of ignorance. Śiva who burnt this place is known as Tripura and His wife is Tripureśī. This also means Bhairavī, the Goddess of Tantra śāstra-s. She is adored by all tantra śāstra-s. Or this could mean that She is the chief of three loka-s of Brahma, Viṣṇu and Śiva. These loka-s (worlds) are situated around Meru, where She resides (refer nāma 775. Meru-nilayā). (Tripura atipaṭhī (atipaṭhī means chief).

788. जयत्सेना
She has a victorious army. She is capable of winning over demons (evil acts). In Hindu scriptures, often references are made to demons. These demons are embodiment of wickedness and gods who win over them represent virtues. Virtues always prevail.

789. निस्त्रैगुण्या
She is devoid of three guṇa-s. These guṇa-s in association with prakṛti are responsible for creation. Please refer nāma-s 139, 397, 398 and 399 for further details.

790. परापरा
There are three forms of the Brahman, para, apara and parā-para. This nāma discusses about the third form. All the three forms of the Brahman has already been discussed in nāma 366. Parā. A brief portion of discussion on nāma 366 is reproduced here. “Parā has three stages. Its original para form is considered as supreme and is full of energy. In order to manifest, it loses its supremacy and energy level gradually and becomes parā-para the mediocre level of supremacy. It further loses its strength at the exact time of manifestation and becomes apara where it loses its supremacy and become manifested.” When Brahman is omnipresent, He has to have both superior and inferior qualities. Śrī Rudraṁ beautifully explains this concept. Brahman is not only a master, but also a servant. He is not only the giver, but also the taker. He is not only the creator but also the destroyer. All the qualities that exist in this universe are placed between the two aspects of the Brahman para and apara. This is the unique quality of the Brahman. Unless this quality of the Brahman is fully understood, Brahman can never be realised. To put it more simply, both a deadly snake and a sage of the highest order are Brahman. We are deluded by the respective forms and fail to realise the Brahman ‘within’ (universality of the soul) due to the influence of māyā. Ramaṇa Mahariṣi says “the ignorant perceive only name and form” (Ramaṇa Gīta. Verse 33). Kṛṣṇa says In Bhagavad Gīta (IX.29) “I am equally present in all beings; there is none hateful or dear to me.” Praśna Upaniṣad (V.2) says paraṃ cā paraṃ ca brahma which means Brahman without attributes (para) and Brahman with attributes (apara). Brahman remains the same and for the purpose of our convenience and easier understanding, we have categorised Him as saguṇa Brahman and nirguṇa Brahman. This can be explained this way to avoid confusion. Śiva is nirguṇa Brahman, Śaktī is saguṇa Brahman, and Śiva-Śaktī is Para-Brahman. This is further explained in nāma 792. Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (II.i.4) says “there are two kinds of knowledge, Para, the Superior cosmic knowledge, and apara inferior knowledge relating to the phenomenal world.” The next verse explains still further. It says “Apara knowledge comprises of the four Vedas, rituals, grammar, phonetics, etymology, etc and para is that by which one knows the Brahman which always remains the same and never decays.” It is made very clear that realising the Brahman is important than knowing Vedas and other rituals. Once Brahman is realised, nothing else required to be known. Śaktī is known as Parā-Śaktī based upon these factors. Parāpara is the intermediate stage between the highest and lowest, a sort of mediocre stage. This is based on the fact that the Brahman is omnipresent. This nāma refers to Her mediocre stage. {Further reading: Nāma-s commencing from 156 explain nirguṇa Brahman and saguṇa Brahman. For example nāma 162 is nir-mohā which means ‘She is without confusion and the next nāma 163 moha-nāśinī which means She destroys confusion in the minds of Her devotees. Nāma 163 refers to nirguṇa Brahman or para and the next nāma refers to saguṇa Brahman or parāpara and apara.}

791. सत्यज्ञानानन्दरूपा
Satya is truth, jñāna is knowledge and ānanda is bliss. She is the combination of truth, knowledge and bliss. Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II.1) says, satyaṃ jñānaṃ ananthaṃ brahma. This refers to the Brahman. Truth, knowledge and infinity is the Brahman. Attributes of the Brahman is being described by the Upaniṣad. There is a difference between the saying of this Upaniṣad and this nāma. Upaniṣad says ananthaṃ (everything or infinity) and the nāma says ānanda (bliss). The compassionate form of the Divine Mother makes this difference. Bliss is one of the important qualities of Lalitāmbikā. When we reach the stage of ānanda (bliss), we tend to forget ananthaṃ (all other extraneous matters). Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (III.ix.28.2) says that knowledge, bliss and Brahman are the same. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (VII. xxiii) says “that which is infinite that is happiness.” This nāma says the nature of the nirguṇa Brahman. While the previous nāma discussed about the saguṇa Brahman, this nāma confirms Her as nirguṇa Brahman once again.

792. सामरस्यपरायणा
Parāyaṇa means devoted to or engaged with chief authority. She is devoted to the principle of equality. With whom She is equal? Of course, with Śiva. Without each other, they cannot function. They have attained each other after performing rigorous penance. Śiva is Self-illuminating Brahman and Śaktī is His svabhāva. Svabhāva means nature, innate or inherent disposition. The nature of Śiva is reflected through Śaktī. Śiva can realise His Self only in Śaktī, who acts a mirror to Him. Śaktī is the power of doership of Śiva. It is said that the ultimate reality were to be merely Śiva, He would become inert. Brahman cannot become inert. Though Śiva continues to be inert, Śaktī, the power holder of Śiva acts as the energetic force in creation, sustenance and dissolution of the universe. Therefore Śiva without Śaktī or Śaktī without Śiva becomes torpid. They are known as the parent of the universe. This nāma says that She is equal to Śiva. If Cit is Śiva, ānanda (bliss) is Śaktī. Cit- ānandā is Śivaśaktī.

793. कपर्दिनी
Hair of Śiva is known as Kaparda. Kaparda means braided and knotted hair (Śrī Rudraṁ V.4). His wife is Kapardinī. In Lagustava of Kālidāsa (verse 11) there is a reference to Her with braided and knotted hair (referring to Her Kāli form).

794. कलामाला
She wears a garland made out of sixty four Kalā-s (arts or tantra-s) that are referred to in nāma 236. Kalā is different from tantra-s. Kalā means art and tantra means tantra śāstra-s involving rituals. Kalā also means arts. There are sixty four types of arts or Kalā-s. Kalā also means beauty, ma means limitless, and la means to bring. Based on this, it can be interpreted that She is of limitless beauty. In fact, anything associated with Her is limitless.

795. कामधुक्
She gives whatever is desired by Her devotees. The same meaning is conveyed in nāma 63. Lalitā triśatī nāma-s 43 and 240 also convey the same meaning. However this is subject to the condition laid down in Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (III.i.10) which says “A person with pure mind can obtain whatever worlds or whatever things he wishes for.” Saundarya Laharī (verse 4) says that “She is an expert in granting more than what is asked for. That too She does not give through Her hands, as with other gods and goddesses. She gives through Her lotus feet.”

796. कामरूपिणी
Kāma means Śiva. She is in the form of Śiva. They are not different. They have everything in common, except the complexion. Śiva is crystal white and She is dark red. Both of them sitting together appear like rising sun (Her red complexion is transfused with the colourless and translucent complexion of Śiva appearing like the rising sun. The dark red colour gets diffused making it appear as orange colour). Brahman has the desire (kāma) to create the universe. Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II.vi.3) says “He (the Brahman) wished (thought within Himself) ‘I will be born as many’.” She becomes the source of desire for creation. This nāma could also mean that She is capable of assuming various forms at Her will. Kāma means desire and rūpiṇī means form.

797. कलानिधिः
She is the source of kalā-s that have been discussed in nāma 794. Śiva Sūtra (I.3) says kalāśarīram which means ‘whose form is activity’. Only through Her activity, the universe is administered. In this context, this nāma means that She is the source of all activities, the Brahman. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (IV.33) “all actions without exception culminate in Knowledge (Brahman).”

798. काव्यकला
Kāvya is one of the arts. Kāvya means endowed with the qualities of a sage or poet, descended or coming from a sage, prophetic, inspired, or poetical. This nāma means She is the inspiration or the source for kāvya-s. All kāvya-s are composed by dedicating (feminism in general like Sītā of Rāmāyaṇa) an eminent place for Her. {Further reading on Rāmāyaṇa: This is a wonderful epic in poetic form composed by sage Vālmīki. The epic contains 24,000 verses in Sanskrit in seven books known as Kāṇḍa-s. They are 1. Bāla-kāṇḍa or Ādi-kāṇḍa, 2. Ayodhyā-kāṇḍa, 3. Araṇya-kāṇḍa, 4. Kishkindhākāṇḍa, 5. Sundara-kāṇḍa, 6. Yuddha-kāṇḍa, and 7. Uttara-kāṇḍa. Part of the first kāṇḍa and the seventh kāṇḍa are thought to be comparatively modern additions. Rāma's character, as described in the Rāmayaṇa, is that of a perfect man, who bears suffering and self-denial with superhuman patience. Rama’s wife is Sītā}

799. रसज्ञा
Rasa means essence or flavour. Rasa also means disposition of the heart or mind, religious sentiment (there are five rasa-s or rati-s forming the five degrees of bhakti, viz. śānti, dāsya, sākhya, vātsalya, and mādhurya. She is in the form of these five rasa-s. Saundarya Laharī (verse 51) refers to eight types of rasa-s. They are love, resentment, anger, wonder, fear, grace, smile and kindness. In addition to the above eight two more rasa-s contentment and fondness are also referred. This nāma means She is the finest of these rasa-s.

800. रसशेवधिः
She is the treasure receptacle of rasa. Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II.vii.2) says raso vi rasaḥ. This translates into ‘that which is, that is to be identified as the sweetness (rasa) in everything.’ Anyone who has this sweetness knows the Self (the Brahman or bliss). The source of joy is the Brahman. When the source is realised, the joy transforms into bliss.

801. पुष्टा
Puśṭi means nourishment. Her form is made up of thirty six tattva-s and beyond. She does not need any nourishment. The entire nourishment emanates from Her or the universe is nourished by Her through these thirty six principles. It can also be said that She is nurtured by the love of Her devotees. Or it can also be explained that She is nourished by the essence (rasa) discussed in the previous nāma.

802. पुरातना
Purātanā means ancient (the oldest). She is so addressed because She is the first amongst creation. Śiva created Her and the entire creation originated from Her.

803. पूज्या
Pūjyā means worshipful. She is worshipful because She is complete in everything. Generally, the form and inherent qualities make a person worshipful. This is because such a person is full of positive energies (due to positive thoughts and virtuous actions), which radiates through the bodily form. After all She is the embodiment of universal energy. Nāma 213 is mahā pūjyā. (Further reading: A good meditation results in positive vibes. Apart from meditation, love for fellow living beings is the biggest source of positive energies. True love makes a person to communicate with plants and animals. Suppose, someone plucks a flower from a plant, he has to learn to express his apologies to the plant for plucking the flower. The flower belongs to the plant. Flowers and fruits are the children of plant kingdom. Such trivial things show the right path to reach the higher levels of spirituality.)

804. पुष्करा
She gives puṣṭi (nāma 801) to all Her devotees (puṣṭi means nourishment). Nāma 801 said that She is nourished and this nāma says She nourishes (compare this with series of nāma-s like 158 and 159, 162 and 163, etc). It is said that there is no difference between ra and la. If the last two alphabets ra is replaced with la then puṣkarā becomes puṣkalā. Puṣkal means copious, abundant, full, complete, etc. Generally puṣkal is an epithet used for Śiva. Puṣkalaṁ means Mount Meru, where She resides. In these contexts, this nāma could also refer to Her nature such as full, complete etc. Śiva is omnipresent and Śiva’s wife Śaktī is also omnipresent. Or it could also refer to Her domicile, Mahā Meru (Śrī Cakra).

805. पुष्करेक्षणा
Puṣkar means several things such as lotus-eyed, blue coloured lotus flower, heaven, sky, earth, tip of the trunk of an elephant, etc. If a full moon falls on the nights of Monday, Tuesdays or Saturdays, that night is known as Puṣkar. The art of dancing, intoxication, etc are also known as Puṣkar. Śiva is also known as Puṣkar. It is difficult to say under what context this nāma is placed here by Vāc Devi-s. If this nāma is taken as description of Her eyes, then there are other nāma-s such as Kamākṣī (nāma 62), Mṛgākṣī (nāma 561), which describe the eternal beauty of Her eyes. Puṣkara also means water that made the earth deluged. At the time of annihilation water surrounded the earth leading to annihilation. Īkṣaṇā means eye sight. In this context Puṣkarekṣaṇā could mean Her motherly look during this deluge for recreation. Contextually also, this interpretation seems to be appropriate.

806. परञ्ज्योतिः
Para means supreme, Jyoti means light and paraṃjyotiḥ means ‘Supreme Light’. Supreme Light means the Brahman. Supreme light is Self-illuminating or the prakāśa aspect of the Brahman. From this Supreme light alone, sun get his light and illuminates the galaxy, that is known to us. A number of Upaniṣad-s talk about this Light. Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (IV.iv.6) says “upon that immortal Light of all lights the gods meditate as longevity.” This means that gods meditate on this Supreme Light for their immortality. Kaṭha Upaniṣad (II.ii.15) explains this further. “In the presence of Brahman, the sun does not shine, nor do the moon and stars, nor does lightning, let alone this fire. When Brahman shines, everything follows. By Its light, all these are lighted.” This is the famous dīpa ārādhana mantra: ”na tatra sūryo bhāti na candratārakaṃ nemā vidyuto bhānti kutoyamagniḥ tameva bhāntamanubhāti sarvaṃ tasya bhāsā sarvamidaṃ vibhāti|” ”न ति सूयो भानत न चन्द्रतारकीं नेमा ववद्यगतो भास्न्द्त कगतोयमस्ननः। तमेव भान्द्तमनभग ानत सविं तस्य भासा सवुलमदींववभानत॥ Chāndogya Upaniṣad (VIII.iii.4) says, param joytiḥ upasampadyate which means attaining the highest light. The Upaniṣad says “Then, this person, who is the embodiment of happiness, emerging from the body and attaining the highest light, assumes his real nature. This is the Self.” Realisation happens in a fraction of a second when a person is immersed in the highest level of spiritual consciousness with flashes of Light appearing within him. She is in the form of that selfilluminating light (the Brahman). To attain this stage no japa or meditation is required. It is only the thought construct that matters. This is why Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (III.ix.10) says, “light is the mind”.

807. परन्धाम
Parama + dhāma = paraṃdhāma. Parama means the highest degree of excellence and dhāma means brilliance (tejas) or a class of super human beings or abode. Bhagavad Gīta (XV.6) says “Neither the sun nor the moon nor the fire can illuminate that supreme self-effulgent state, attaining to which they never return to this world. That is My Supreme Abode.” Kṛṣṇa uses the word paraṃdhāma for Supreme Abode. In the previous nāma it is said that She is self-illuminating. This nāma talks about the nature of the Light. From the Supreme Light emanates the Supreme brilliance. This Supreme Light and its tejas (Supreme brilliance or radiance) go together. In the highest level of consciousness, the empirical individual through the process of thought constructs first, moves towards paraṃdhāma and after transcending paraṃdhāma, he reaches Paraṃjyotiḥ. This is the process of merging with the Brahman. When he enters the brilliance of light (paraṃdhāma) he is showered with bliss and when he moves still further, he merges with the Selfilluminating Brahman (Paraṃjyotiḥ). This is an appropriate context where one can recall the famous saying of Kaṭha Upaniṣad (I.iii.9) ‘tad Viśṇoḥ paramaṃ padam’ (that state which is the highest, where the individual self merges with the Cosmic Self). Viṣṇu is known as Paraṃdhāman. {Further reading - A yogi’s experience of effulgence: “If a person is not Buddha or awakened enough, he won’t be able to resist His emergence as such, i.e. as Effulgence. It feels as if one is blasted by plasma cannon. I mean, it is like being shot by a powerful weapon. His Effulgence bombs you with short but continuous waves of energy. Shocking! People not duly trained and deserving couldn’t tolerate this without becoming unconscious (stupefied). That’s why the Lord is not appearing in that way to them yet. If He did so, they would think that they went into a deep coma or something. So, everything is working as it should and at the right time. When His Effulgence appears in that pulsating manner, if you are awanened enough, you can resist and enjoy It such and as It is. As the shots impact on you, so to speak, you are forced to open the mouth (vismayamudrā or mudrā of amazement) and your eyes fill with tears. It is a stunning experience! After that, one wonders, what one was doing before. Living without that kind of experience is like being dead, but one doesn’t notice that till he gets the emergence of His Effulgence. But to resist It and accordingly enjoy It, one must be awakened enough or the mind automatically shuts down like a fuse. I suppose, due to the intensity of the experience, that a “usual” mind could be burnt up if it doesn’t shut down in that way. Therefore, everything works as it should. One wants speed up but that’s not possible unless one’s system survives the experience. For that, one must be trained and deserving enough.”}

808. परमाणुः
She is the Supreme atom (the aboriginal matter). Supreme atom means smaller than an atom (smaller than the smallest). In today’s context this can be compared to neutron (a sub-atomic particle). This is explained in Kaṭha Upaniṣad (I.ii.20) which says, “aṇoḥ aṇiyān’ meaning smaller than the smallest. Smaller than the smallest, gives bigger than the biggest. The entire creation originates from paramāṇuḥ or aṇoḥ aṇiyān (neutron). Anu also means mantra. Then, the nāma means Her Pañcadaśī mantra. Para means Supreme and anu means mantra. The Supreme mantra is always Her Pañcadaśī mantra.

809. परात्परा
Para means supreme. Parātpara means the highest level of Supremacy. There is nothing superior to parātpara. During navāvaraṇa pūjā, in ninth āvaraṇa, there is a special ninth āvaraṇa pūjā that can be performed only by those who got initiated into ṣodaśī mantra. They worship Her by addressing Her as “parayā (nāma 366), aparayā, parāparayā (nāma 790)” by using trikhaṇḍa mudra. These three stages have been discussed in nāma 790. This nāma is ‘parātparā’, the higher stage than parā. This stage is beyond the reach of verbal description as this is beyond human comprehension. This is subtler than the subtlest. Her subtlest form is kuṇḍalinī and parātparā is subtler than kuṇḍalinī. Lalitā Triśatī nāma 236 is sāmānādhika varjitā which means ‘She is beyond comparison’. Bhagavad Gīta (XI.43) says “Lord of incomparable might, in all the three worlds there is none else even equal to you. How then, any better?” Nāma 198 of this Sahasranāma also conveys the same meaning. There is also an interpretation that She is superior to Brahma, Viṣṇu and Śiva.

810. पाशहस्ता
She has a noose in Her hand. This has been already discussed in nāma 6. Pāśa also means anything that binds a soul. This nāma could also mean that She helps in unbinding a soul from karmic afflictions for realisation. As long as karma-s remain, realisation is not possible.

811. पाशहन्त्री
She is the destroyer of pāśa. Pāśa here means bondage, attachment, etc. These are the negative factors in realizing Śiva. She destroys bondage and attachments for those who deserve to know Śiva. Please recall nāma 727 Śiva jñāna pradāyinī.

812. परमन्त्रविभेदिनी
Para means alien or hostile. Para is different from parā. Para mantra means mantra-s that cause enmity. These types of mantra-s are known as ari mantra-s. These mantra-s are used in witchcraft and black magic. Vibhedini means breaks apart. By destroying such evil mantra-s, She protects Her devotees. This nāma is also split as para + mantra + avi + bhedini. Para also means chief matter or paramount object, mantra means those who chant mantra-s, avi means sins (this meaning is as per Liṅga Purāṇa – Chapter 92 – verse 143. Dictionaries do not convey this meaning. Liṅga Purāṇa refers to a place called Avimukta, an extinct place equivalent to Vārāṇasī, (so called after the names of two rivers, varaṇā and asī. It is also known as Benares) a holy Indian city said to be free of all sins and bhedini means destroyer. This means that She destroys sins of those who recite supreme mantra-s like Pañcadaśī and ṣodaśī.

813. मूर्ता
She is with forms. Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (II.iii.1) says “Brahman has two forms – gross and subtle”. Formless Brahman is made as mūrtā due to ignorance or māyā.

814. अमूर्ता
She is without forms. Subtle is not the right word to interpret this nāma. She is beyond Her subtlest form kuṇḍalinī. Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (II.iii.3) describes this formless as “it is immortal, unlimited and undefined.” Brahman has two distinct characters – without form and with form. Without form is realised as Self-illuminating light (nāma 806) and with form is seen in places of worship such as idols, Śrī Cakra, etc. A devotee is said to be advancing spiritually only if he is able to migrate from the latter stage to the former stage. These two nāma-s can also be interpreted as follows. Out of the five elements, ākaś and air are invisible (amūrta). Earth, fire and water are visible (mūrta). She is in the form of these elements. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma nāma 720 is a-mūrtimān. Kṛṣṇa says In Bhagavad Gita (IV.6) “Though birth less and deathless, and the Lord of all beings, I manifest myself through my own yogamāyā (divine potency known as māyā), keeping my Nature (prakṛti) under control.” This explains Divine incarnations. Forms are the result of karma-s. Since Brahman is devoid of karma-s, He is formless.

815. अनित्यतृप्ता
Nāma 556 is nitya-tṛptā. A-nitya means things that are perishable. She is happy with the offerings of perishables. In fact, She does not need either perishable or imperishable as everything originates from Her. What She needs is only the unstinted and untainted devotion. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (IX.26) “Whoever offers to me with love, a leaf, a flower, a fruit and water I appear in person to them”. (Further reading: This nāma should be interpreted as ‘EVEN by perishable offerings’. She is too fond of blemishless or pure devotion in terms of nāma 118 than perishable offerings. One has to spend more time in realising Her than worshipping Her. In other words, one has to spend more time on meditating upon Her, rather than associating with rituals. However, rituals form the strong foundation to higher level of spirituality. But the transition from rituals to meditation should be at the earliest, as otherwise, one could be wasting his precious time.)

816. मुनिमानसहंसिका
She appears as swans in the minds of sages. Muni means sages, mānasa means expressed in mind and haṃsikā means swans. Please refer nāma 372. bhakta-mānasa-haṃsikā that conveys the same meaning. The difference is between muni and bhakta. Muni-s (sages) are referred here specifically as they are realised souls. Bhakta means everyone who is devoted to Her. All devotees are not realized souls. A bhakta transforms in the arena of his mind into a muni. This is true transformation.

817. सत्यव्रता
She can be attained by the vow of speaking truth always. She Herself is the embodiment of Truth (nāma 693). Satyam means the Brahman (satyam jñānam anantaṁ Brahma). Śiva sūtra (III.26) says śarīravṛttir vratam which means ‘remaining in the body is a vow of pious act.’ According to Śiva sūtra, result of such vows is Śiva realisation. Vow is mental determination. The one who is spiritually bankrupt (mind) by exhibiting religious piety (body) never attains Her. The importance of speaking truth is emphasized in this nāma. In Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa (VI.xviii.33) Śrī Rāma says “I vouchsafe security against all living beings to him who comes to me only once and seeks protection (from me), saying ‘I am yours’: such is my vow.”

818. सत्यरूपा
She is the embodiment of truth. Truth prevails during past, present and future. Rig-Veda (VII.104.12) says “A prudent person easily discriminates between truth and falsehood, since the two words are mutually at variance. Of these two, the love-divine, cherishes truth and virtue. He, verily, destroys the falsehood.” The next verse says “All such persons lie entangled in the chair of Lord of resplendence.” Truth is considered as one of the important aspects of spirituality. That is why She likes those who speak truth. Brahman has two aspects sat and a-sat. Śiva along with Śaktī sustains this universe by nurturing sat (truth) by destroying a-sat (lie).

819. सर्वान्तर्यामिनी
She exists in the soul within or She exists as soul within. She is realised only by internal search. She is searched in all the places except the place where She actually resides. Ignorance is the cause for searching Her elsewhere in vain. All the Upaniṣad-s affirm uniformly that the Brahman is within. Māṇḍūkya Upaniṣad (Āgama prakarana – verse 6) uses the word antaryāmi. The Upaniṣad says “He (Brahman) knows everything. He is the indwelling controller (antaryāmi) of all. All things arise from Him and also merge into Him.” Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (III.vii.3) says “...who controls the earth from within, is the Internal Ruler, your own immortal self.” Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II.6) says “He created them and then entered into them. Having entered into them, he in some cases assumed forms and in other cases remained formless.” All the Upaniṣads advise to look within for Self-realisation. She is already there in our body, well before our birth.

820. सती
She was born to Dakṣa as Satī. Liṅga Purāṇa (V.27) says “Satī, the mental creation of the Lord was adopted as his daughter by Dakṣa.” Sati reproached Her father for not inviting Śiva to the sacrifice and then as expiation of Her father’s sin, She immolated Herself. The scene appears in Śrīmad Bhāgavata (IV.4.15-18). Satī addresses Her father thus: “You hate Lord Śiva of sacred renown, whose command is inviolable, nay, whose celebrated name of two syllables (लश व), uttered with the tongue even once and that too casually, immediately wipes out the sins of men who utter them. You are a coursed indeed. You bear enmity to that Befriender of the universe, whose lotus feet are not only resorted to by the bee-like mind of exalted souls, thirsting for honey in the shape of the joy of absorption in Brahman, but also shower the blessings sought after by interested people. So not people other than you, such as Brahma (the Creator) and others, who place on their heads flowers, etc dropped from His feet, know Him to be inauspicious, though bearing the appellation of Śiva (all auspiciousness) – Him who lived in the company of friends in crematories throwing about His matted locks and wearing on His person the wreaths lying there as well as the ashes (of funeral pyre) and human skulls? A man should shut his ears and leave the place where his master – a defender of righteousness – is being vituperated by unbridled man, in case he is powerless (to take the life of reviler of to lay down his own life); or, if he has the power, he should forcibly cut off the vile tongue that indulges in such blasphemy, and then give up his own life as well, if need be. Such is the course of duty. Therefore, I shall no longer retain this body, begotten of you, a villifier of Lord Śiva. For the wise declare that one gets purified only by vomiting the impure food consumed through ignorance.” She destroyed the yajñā of Dakṣa (nāma 600) and then immolated Herself and was reborn as Umā to Himavān (nāma 633). In Saundarya Laharī (verse 96), Ādi Śaṁkarā addresses Her as Satī. In this context, Satī means virtuous wife. He calls Her as satīnammacarame which means first among the virtuous women.

821. ब्रह्माणी
She is the energy of the Brahman (Śiva). Śiva is prakāśa and Śaktī is vimarśa. The ultimate Reality is Śiva and the universal process is Śaktī. The one without the other cannot function. Aṇī means the pin of the axle of a cart. Without this aṇī the cart cannot run. In this context, the nāma means that Brahman (Śiva) cannot function without Śaktī (aṇī). Brahman is Śiva and Brahmāṇī, the wife of Brahman is Śaktī. This is like Bhairava and Bhairavī.

822. ब्रह्म
She is the Brahman. Since there is no difference between Śiva and Śaktī, She is addressed here as Brahman. There are many nāma-s in this Sahasranāma which affirme Her Brahman status. One merges with the Brahman at the time of liberation, not to be born again. This Sahasranāma, Upaniṣads, Bhagavad Gīta all try to explain the Brahman in their own way. Brahman can only be explained and cannot be revealed. Since the Brahman does not have a form, the experiences of realised persons differ (Brahma Sūtra III.ii.25). Advita philosophy of Śaṃkarācārya says that the Self is the only Reality and others are false. The Self is made up of pure knowledge that ultimately leads to pure consciousness (cit). Since the Reality cannot undergo changes, It becomes eternal. The qualities of the Self (Brahman) are – nirviśeṣā (non-characterisation), nirguṇa (devoid of qualities), nirvikārā (without any modifications), śuddha (purity absolute) and sat-cit-ānanda (existence, consciousness and bliss). In the ultimate stage, during bliss the practitioner remains all alone with the highest level of consciousness. At this level, even Śaktī does not exist. Here Śaktī merges into Śiva who alone remains as that level consciousness. This is known as the Brahman. This nāma says She is That. Spiritual consciousness, in the most concentrated form germinates and grows when sown in the right soil duly nurtured by mediation. She, the Brahman is attained at the end. When She becomes nirguṇa Brahman (without qualities), She merges into Śiva (union of Śiva and Śaktī) and the merged Śiva alone exists. When She becomes saguṇa Brahman (with qualities and attributes), She alone exists without Śiva.

823. जननी
The Mother or Śrī Mātā (nāma 1). It also means the Creator of the universe. Nāma 264 is srṣṭi-kartrī. Nāma-s 295, 337, 457, 826 and 934 talk about Her universal Motherhood. This nāma in conjunction with the previous nāma is recited as ‘brahma-janani’.

824. बहुरूपा
She has multi fold forms. This aspect has been dealt with in various nāma-s. All that exist in the universe is Brahman. Due to the effect of māyā, Brahman is recognised in various shapes and forms through senses. When the thought process becomes devoid of experience of multiform existence, it is known as Self-realisation. Bahu-rūpā because, She not only exists in living beings, but also prevails as sound (Śabda Brahman). Śrī Devi Māhātmyam refers to Her various forms while slaying demon Bhaṇdāsura. In Sūta Saṁhitā it is said, ‘She is the super most of the Supreme, who is one and two and sixteen and thirty two.’ One means the Brahman. Two means vowels and consonants. Sixteen means the sixteen vowels. Thirty two means thirty two consonants. (Consonants are thirty five). In terms of nāma 804 ra and la are the same. Now it becomes 34. Generally the last alphabet kṣa क्ष (as it is a compound alphabet made up of ka + śa) is not reckoned with. Therefore it becomes thirty three. The letter ha is also not considered as it is the origin of letters. Now the consonants become thirty two. The numeric thirty two has relevance to this Sahasranāma as only thirty two alphabets are used at the beginning of each of the one thousand nāma-s. Śri Rudraṁ (11.1) says ‘sahsrāni sahasraśaḥ’ which means thousands of Rudra-s in thousands of forms. Their wives are known as Rudrāṇī-s. She is in the form all these Rudrāṇī-s and Śiva is in the form of all the Rudra-s. {For further reading: The vowels are considered as bīja (Śiva) and consonants are considered as yoni (Śaktī). All the vowels and consonants are classified into eight divisions and each of the divisions give rise to one of eight mātā-s (aṣṭa mātā-s). These eight mātā-s along with Her original form make nine, which represent nava rasa (nine types of expressions: love, heroism, disgust, fury, mirth, terror, pity, wonder and tranquillity). If all the alphabets (fifty) are taken into account, then each letter shines as one Rudra, making the number of Rudra-s to fifty. Number of Rudra-s varies in different texts.} Viṣṇu Sahasranāma nāma 721 is aneka-mūrtī. She is worshipped in different forms and each form has certain specific qualities. For example, Sarasvatī is worshipped for knowledge, Lakṣmī worshipped for wealth, etc. She becomes many (creation) and many become One (annihilation).

825. बुधार्चिता
She is worshipped by the knowledgeable. Knowledgeable are Selfrealised persons. Still they perform actions to nullify their karma-s. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (VII.16) “Four types of devotees worship me, the seeker of worldly possessions, the afflicted, the seeker for knowledge and man of wisdom.”

826. प्रसवित्री
She gives birth to universe. Literally it means that She has delivered the universe. The universe is born out of the conjugal bliss of Śiva and Śaktī. This nāma can be attributed to Her parā-devi form. It is said “One should concentrate on the delightful mind, whether by itself or permeated by pranic breath leading to blissful state. It is the association of blessedness which is the worship of the heart, the essential nature of parā-devi.” The creation takes place when kriya śaktī of Lalitai unites with jñāna śaktī of Śiva. Netra Tantra (VII.40) says “Parā Śaktī is the source of all the gods and all the śaktī-s (energies). Everything proceeds from Her.”

827. प्रचण्डा
She is wrathful. Brahman is also wrathful to enforce discipline. Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II.viii.1) and Kaṭha Upaniṣad (II.iii.3) both say, “The wind blows out of fear of Him (Brahman). The sun also shines out of fear. Out of fear of Him Fire, Indra and Death, all rush to do their respective duties.” Brahma sūtra (I.iii.39) says, “universe emerges and vibrates because there is prāṇa that is a great terror, like an uplifted thunder.” Viṣṇu Sahasranāma 315 is krodakrit convey the same meaning. Arjuna addresses Kṛṣṇa in Bhagavad Gīta (XI.20) “Seeing this transcendent, dreadful form of Yours, Oh! Soul of the universe, all the three worlds feel greatly alarmed.” Caṇḍi (the combined form of Durgā, Lakṣmī and Sarasvatī) is originated from the root word caṇḍiman which means to charge, make angry or violent. Śrī Rudraṁ begins by offering obeisance to Rudra’s anger (nāmaste Rudra-manyava udhota iśvae namaḥ) This nāma discusses one of the qualities of the Brahman with attributes. Anger is a quality of the saguṇa Brahman to enforce discipline for sustaining the universe.

828. आज्ञा
Ājñā means orders. She commands. If Her orders are not obeyed She is enraged as per previous nāma. Śiva says in Liṅga Purāṇa (I.87.9-11) “She is śruti and smṛti. She is fortitude, stabilised by me. She is the power of knowledge, kriya (rite) and icchā (will). She is Ājñā. Undoubtedly we are the vidyā-s. The prakṛti (cause) does not belong to the jīva (embodied soul). Nor is She a vikṛti (effect) on consideration. She is māyā. She is not a vikāra (effect only). Formerly She originated from my mouth at my behest. She is the eternal deity of five faces (possibly referring to Gāyatrī). She is highly blessed and bestows fearlessness of the worlds. At Her ājñā (here it means command), I think about the welfare of the worlds. I am Śiva.” Instead of ājñā, this nāma is alternatively referred to as jñā. Jñā means to know, to have knowledge. Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (VI.2) says, yenāvrtaṃ nityamidaṃ hi sarvaṃ jñaḥ kālakāro guṇī sarvavidyah. This means “The universe is enveloped by Him. He alone knows that He is all knowing. He creates time. He is pure.” Knowledge is considered as the prime quality of the Brahman. Hence, importance is given to the highest quality of knowledge to know Him. In this context, this nāma addresses Her as the source of knowledge or the embodiment of knowledge.

829. प्रतिष्ठा
She is the foundation. Mahānārāyaṇa Upaniṣad (79.7) says “Dharma, religious righteousness is the support of the whole universe. All are supported by dharma.” Sixteen syllable meter is also known as pratiṣṭā. Liṅga Purāṇa (II.21.66) says “Combination of kalā-s in the order of destruction is sāntyatītā, śānti, vidyā, amalā, pratiṣṭhā and nivṛtti.” Tattva of water (jala tattva) is known as pratiśṭa kalā. This nāma means that She forms the foundation of the universe. This foundation is made up of dharma and righteousness. (Dharma can be compared to cement and righteousness can be compared to sand. The one without the other cannot form a good foundation. The universe is created and sustained only on the principle of interdependence. The Supreme authorities, Śiva and Śaktī are also interdependent. Individual soul and body are interdependent for karmic unfolding.)

830. प्रकटाकृतिः
Prakaṭa means evident, manifest, clear, public and ākṛti means form, figure shape. This nāma means that Her form or nature is made known to all. Brahman is present in all the living beings. But due to the influence of māyā, a man considers himself as body, different from the Brahman. He recognises him only through his body and others also recognise him through his gross body. Here “I” consciousness prevails. But what one fails to understand is, that ‘I’ is Śiva. Mahānārāyaṇa Upaniṣad (29.1) says “Certainly all this is water. All created beings are water. The vital breaths in the body are water.” Thus the Upaniṣad proceeds to say that everything is water. If interpretation is made this way, then She is in the form of holy waters (rivers). In this context, the nāma says that She is revealed to the universe in the form of water. In Śrī Cakra worship, devi-s of first āvaraṇa are known as prakaṭa yogini-s. Possibly it can be said that these prakaṭa yogini-s are Her form or these yogini-s reveal Her true nature. Yogini means a female fairy, witch, sorceress (represented as eight in number and as created by Durgā and attendant on Her or on Śiva.)

831. प्राणेश्वरी
She is prāṇa or the chief of prāṇa -s. Brahma Sūtra (I.i.28) says prāṇastathā'nugamāt (प्राणस्तथाऽनगगमात)् which means ‘Brahman is prāṇa, because It is comprehended thus’. It is also said that prāṇa is identified with consciousness and the purest form of consciousness is the Brahman. Chāndogya Upaniṣad ((I.xi.5) also says “In prāṇa all things appear and disappear”. Creation and dissolution are the exclusive qualities of the Brahman. Hence prāṇa is called as Brahman. Kaṭha Upaniṣad (I.ii.14) says sarve Vedā yat padam āmananti. All the Vedas praise the goal (the highest, the Brahman). This interpretation is based on pra means exalted and ana means Vedas. Individual consciousness bound by ego in association with prāṇa and senses manifest in a bodily form. Thus prāṇa being one of the vital forces of creation, She is addressed here as the chief of prāṇa - s.

832. प्राणदात्री
Prāṇa nourishes senses. Without prāṇa, senses and mind cannot function. The previous nāma said that She is the chief of prāṇa (possibly embodiment of prāṇa) and this nāma says that She is the giver of prāṇa. Brahma Sūtra (II.iv5) says, “prāṇa-s must have originated from the Brahman, since speech is preceded by them.” Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (II.i.8) says, tasmāt sapta prāṇaḥ prabhavanti which means ‘from That (Brahman) seven prāṇa-s (prāṇa here means seven organs - two eyes, two nostrils, two ears, and mouth) have come. This Upaniṣad confirms the statement of Kaṭha Upaniṣad referred in the previous nāma. Taittirīya Upaniṣad (I.vii) discusses further on this. It refers to prāṇa, vyāna, upāna, udāna and samāna the five types of prāṇa-s. The Upaniṣad calls these five as prāna pāṇkta (pāṇkta means fivefold) meaning group of prāṇa-s. This prāna pāṇkta make indriya pāṇkta to function (functional senses). Therefore, it is apparent that without prāṇa, senses cannot function. She gives that ‘vital force’ called prāṇa, without which life is not sustainable. When She provides prāṇa to the universe, She becomes Parā-Śaktī or parā-prakṛti. Prāṇa is subjective energy or vital force which is derived from the Brahman. This nāma again reaffirms Her as the Brahman that permeates and sustains.

833. पञ्चाशत्पीठरूपिणी
Pancāśa means fifty, pīṭha means (lit) seat and rupiṇī means form. Sāradā Tilakam (an ancient treatise on tantra) opens by saying ‘Let the Supreme being embodied by ever-enduring bliss, pervaded the universe of movable and immovable objects, formed into words and their meaning by fifty alphabetical letters (a to kṣa) perennially emanating which is known as Śabda Brahman. In other words, this great tantric treatise opens by paying obeisance to Her. Only the next verse pays respects to Śiva. Sanskrit alphabets are fifty or fifty one depending upon the number of vowels or consonants (inclusion of ॡ (lū). Elsewhere, it is said that kṣa क्ष (consonant) is not to be included. There are a few who does not include ‘la’ in consonants). Varivasyaa-rahasya (II.35) says that each of the three kūṭa-s of Pañcadaśī mantra gives rise to sixteen alphabets, totalling to forty eight (क्ष and ह excluded). Therefore, this nāma means that She is in the form of fifty alphabets of Sanskrit. Her manifestation in alphabets is known as Śabda Brahman. There are some interpretations that fifty one (or fifty) means the fifty one Śaktī piṭha-s. When Śiva was not invited by Dakṣa to participate in a yajñā organised by demon Dakṣa, father of Satī (nāma 820), an incarnation of Śaktī, She immolated Herself. Śiva carrying Her corpse was milling around. Viṣṇu cut the corpse into fifty one pieces that fell in fifty one different places. These places are known as fifty one Śaktī piṭha-s. Again, this is only for academic interest and this nāma has nothing to do with the Śaktī piṭha-s. Śaktī piṭha-s are only later developments. {Further reading on Sanskrit letters: There is no consistency regarding the number of Sanskrit letters. In order to resolve the issue I wrote to Mr. Gabriel Pradīpaka, an exponent in Sanskrit. He owns an exclusive web site (www.sanskrit-sanscrito.com.ar) for Sanskrit literature and dedicated his life to the study of Sanskrit scriptures. His reply is reproduced here. “The alphabet is normally including ḹ (I didn't include it because it is an invented letter in order to keep the sequence short-long). Sometimes it includes kṣa too. This conjunct is formed from ka + sa (NOT ṣa). The letter you quoted is the archaic Vedic l (written ḻ in the IAST scheme) and only used in old Vedic scriptures. Now, it is generally replaced with ḍ if it is between "two vowels", i.e. "vowel + ळ + vowel = vowel + ḍ + vowel (but only between vowels and not otherwise). Despite this possible replacement, I always prefer to write it as such, i.e. ळ and ḻ But if you include ḹ, the number is forty-nine. Others add kṣa (e.g. Kṣemarāja in his studies) and the number amounts to fifty. And even others add the Vedic l (ळ or ḻ), which tantamounts to fifty one. The standard for grammatical studies would be forty-eight (the scheme I use). For philosophical studies, the number fifty is better. And if you need fifty one to develop some other studies, you can do it! Anyway, the alphabet “in practice” is always composed of forty eight letters, hence my choice. You don't need more letters to write in Sanskrit "in practice". And this has been so for centuries. Of course, the sages added more letters to the "raw" alphabet for meeting some needs. But this is from the philosophical viewpoint, not from the practical one. So, you can choose the scheme you like better "for philosophical studies" but in practice you never need more than 48 characters. The vowel ḹ is practically never seen in practice. And kṣa is really a conjunct formed from two letters. Well, there is all the time this matter with the quantity of petals in the cakrá-s. But there are some problems. Four petals (Mūlādhāra), six petals (Svādhiṣṭhāna), ten petals (Maṇipūra), twelve petals (Anāhata), sixteen petals (Viśuddha) and two petals (Ājñā) = fifty petals. So, one does the math and the number coincides with the amount of letters in the alphabet. Then some say that 50 x 20 = 1000 petals of the Sahasrāra, while others say that it should be 48 x 20 = 960 petals of the Sahasrāra (not including the two petals of Ājñā in the process). But according to my findings, Ājñā has ninety-six petals not two. So, there are forty-eight petals looking like one petal on the left and other forty-eight looking like one on the right. Besides, its colour is not white but very light pinkish. One could wonder how is this possible when all the time people say there are two petals. Because the forty-eight petals at every side are so tightly arranged that they look like one petal! Also, if you look at the sequence of the number of petals: 4 --> 6 --> 10 --> 12 --> 16 --> 2 ... Something is inconsistent there because the number of petals should continue increasing. But now, consider this: 4 --> 6 --> 10 --> 12 --> 16 --> 96 ... it is more consistent. Because 96 is not only a bigger number, but also because being equal to 48 + 48, it means that there are forty-eight connections with the respective forty-eight petals of the lower cakrá-s from both petals of Ājñā. This implies that Ājñā is doubly connected with the other five cakrá-s forming a circuit (hence the double connection). Well, now the final number would be: 144 petals ... and yes, the teaching that 144 x 20 = 1000 petals is no more valid, since it is really 144 x 7 = 1008 petals. Well, what are 8 petals more or less? If you consider this you will notice that seven is exactly the number of major cakrá-s and that 144 is 12 x 12. The number 12 is sacred in Triká, especially to calculate the distances in the body (e.g. Brahmarandhra is twelve fingers above Ājñā, etc.). Finally, one can use 48, 49, 50 or 51 (the number one likes), because the contexts of the studies vary. But “now in practice” (and it has been happening for centuries) forty-eight characters are “actually” used in Classic Sanskrit as ḹ is practically non-existent, kṣa is a conjunct formed from two letters and ळ (ḻ) occurs in the ancient Veda-s only. And regarding the theory linking the number of petals to the letters of the alphabet, everything holds true except for that detail with the number of petals of Ājñā.}

834. विश‍ृङ्खला
vi means without and śṛuṇkalā means bondage. She is without bondage. Bondage is the quality of man. Brahman is beyond bondage. Any action, be it good or bad, causes bondage. Bondage is caused by performing actions prescribed by scriptures with ego or not performing the prescribed actions. Both have the same effect and cause karmic afflictions. This nāma says that She is beyond such karmic afflictions, while performing Her duties. This nāma says that She remains unfettered.

835. विविक्तस्था
She abides in reclusive places. Reclusive places mean the hearts of learned men. Learned men are those who can differentiate between the Self and self. Worshipping Śaktī should be done only in privacy. She will not manifest in crowd. Generally, crowd cause distorted vibes as different persons have different thoughts. But, in places where bhajana or spiritual discourses are performed, positive vibrations increase manifold due to unified focusing of thoughts, leading to ecstasy. She manifests only in places of purity (nāma 765 śuddha). Places of purity mean mental purity of Self-realized persons. This nāma says that She manifests in the minds of Self-realized persons. {For further reading: Mental purity is more important than physical purity. When mind is crowded with thoughts, it cannot be focused. Unless mind is focused on Her, it is not possible to attain Her. Mind is the only tool available to attain Her. The mind can be controlled by three means. One is through prāṇāyāma. The second is the focused consciousness using the internal tools or antaḥkaraṇa. The third is samādhi. This is realisation by personal experience. Sage Patañjali says in his Yoga Sūtra (I.4) “when the mind is not resolved, silenced and purified, the seer is indentified with modifications.” Yoga Sūtra says that everything arises from the mind. Mind can be purified only if one becomes devoid of attachments, desires and ego. Spiritual progression can be measured only by the presence of three elements in one’s thoughts. One’s spiritual progression should not be ascertained from others. One has to be his own judge in measuring his spiritual progression.)

836. वीरमाता
Vīra means Lord Gaṇeśa and His mother is Vīra-mātā. Vīra also means warriors. Since, She Herself is a warrior, She is addressed here as mother of warriors. Warriors are those who fight against evil. Nāma 777 says that She is worshipped by warriors. Nāma 899 is Vīra which means She Herself is a warrior. Her actions as warrior have been described in Devi Māhātmyam. The best of devotees are also known as warriors. The one who conquers ego is known as warrior. She is the mother of such devotees. They call Her by different names such as Ma, Divine Mother, Mother, Mātā etc.

837. वियत्प्रसूः
The creator of ākāś or ether element. The element of ākāś originated from the Brahman and from akash other elements originated. Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II.1) says tasmāt vai etasmāt ātmanaḥ, ākāsaḥ saṃbhūtaḥ. This means From the Self (the Brahman) originated space. The Upaniṣad continues to say that from space air, from air fire, from fire water, from water earth, from earth plants, from plants food and from food human beings originated. This Upaniṣad also compares a human being to that of a bird. A reference can be made to nāma 550 that convey the same meaning.

838. मुकुन्दा
She gives salvation to jīva-s. Mahā Viṣṇu is known as Mukundā. The one who gives mukti is known as Mukundā. Mukti means final salvation, after which an individual soul ceases to exist. It merges with the Brahman. Mukti is of three types, Krama mukti (gradual liberation), videha mukti (final liberation), and sadya mukti (immediate liberation). Mukti or liberation can be explained as the cessation of all miseries and attainment of the absolute bliss of the Brahman.

839. मुक्तिनिलया
She is the embodiment of mukti. What She has, She shares with Her devotees (like nāma-s 172 and 173). Mukti is the stage where the self is completely disconnected from intellect causing liberation. It is the complete isolation of ‘self’ from the objective universe called prakṛti. Released from all physical and psychical limitations, the self becomes aloof from the realm of mind and matter and shines as omnipresent spirit ever pure and free. Please refer nāma 625. Vedānta and sāṁkhya yoga provide different routes to liberation. Vedānta says that one should not dissociate the self from the mind and sāṁkhya yoga says that one should dissociate the self from the mind. There is an Upaniṣad by name Muktikoupaniṣad, the last of 108 Upaniṣads. This Upaniṣad names all the 108 Upaniṣads. This Upaniṣad is said to have been told by Lord Rāma at the request of Hanuman.

840. मूलविग्रहरूपिणी
Lalitāmbikā is the root of all śaktī-s. Vigraha means to assume form and mūla means origin, original, foundation, etc. mūla vigraha means the original form. This is Her Śrī Mātā form. There is an Upaniṣad called Bahvṛcopaniṣad. It is says that in the beginning She alone existed. From Her originated Brahma, Viṣṇu and Rudra. She is known as Mahā Tripurasundarī. The Upaniṣad proceeds to mention Her different forms such as ṣodaśī, Pañcadaśī, Bālā, Caṇḍī, etc. This nāma says that She is the root of all energies. The root energy sourced from Śiva and known as Śaktī, manifest as different energies during creation, sustenance and dissolution.

841. भावज्ञा
Bhāva has too many meanings: becoming, transition into, continuance, condition, character, intention, to make a firm resolution, learned man, universe, womb, superhuman power, meditation, etc. This nāma can fit into any of the above meanings. Different scriptures have attributed different contextual interpretations to Bhāva. In the present context this nāma means that She is the knower of bhāva of all beings. She knows mental modifications of men. Some will have dual characteristics. What they think will be different from what they speak. She knows the thoughts of such men. If She happens to know that one’s thoughts and actions differ, She punishes them in terms of nāma 827 pracaṇḍā. The root of bhāva is bhu, the unconditioned. Nāma-s like 397, 398 and 399 have already discussed Her unconditioned state. In an ancient treatise known as Yogini hṛdaya six types of interpretations are given to Pañcadaśī mantra and one among them is bhāvārta. It can be said that this nāma refers to Her different lineaments and attributes.

842. भवरोगघ्नी
Bhava is used here to mean saṃsāra or worldly life. Saṃsāra is referred to as a disease and She relieves the pains of saṃsāra. Śiva is said to be the alleviator of miseries of saṃsāra. Bhava (root word is bhū) also means Śiva and his consort Śaktī. Both of them alleviate the pains of worldly life. Roga means disease. Śrī Viṣṇu Sahasranāma nāma-s 578 and 579 refer to this attribute of the Brahman. Rig Veda (II.33.4) says bhiśaktamaṃ ava bhiśajāṃ sriṇomi which means ‘I hear You to be the most competent one among physicians.’ Physician because, She cures the disease of saṃsāra. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (IX.1) “I shall now unfold the most secret knowledge of nirguṇa Brahman along with the knowledge of divinity, knowing which you shall be free from the evil of saṃsāra.” {For further reading: Saṃsāra (transmigration of existence) can be explained as the continuous process of birth and death. This is due to ignorance or a-vidyā. Due to the prevailing ignorance, saṃsāra is embroiled in full of pairs and opposites. It is unreal and full of unbearable sufferings and inconsequential pleasures. It is under the sway of avidyā or nescience, a soul undergoes endless births, bound by passions, fears, desires and pains. The psychophysical view of human existence is closely related to the doctrine of karma or the law of karma. As long as one is bound by saṃsāra, realisation and ultimate liberation is not possible. Kṛṣṇa gives solution to get away from the clutches of saṃsāra. He says “Desire, anger and greed, the triple gates of hell brings about the ruination of a soul. Therefore, one should avoid all these three.” (Bhagavad Gīta XVI.21)} This nāma says that She frees Her devotees from the adversities of saṃsāra.

843. भवचक्रप्रवर्तिनी
Saṃsāra is compared to a wheel which is rotated by Her. Rotation of a wheel is compared to births and consequential deaths. A point in a wheel goes up and comes down and in the same way births and deaths happen like the rotation of a wheel, to those who indulge in saṃsāra. Remedial measure to get away from the hardships of saṃsāra is discussed in the previous nāma. It is said, ‘Wise men worship Hari (Viṣṇu), the remover of pain of those who seek refuge in Him.’ Bhava means Śiva, cakra means mind (as per Viṣṇu Purāṇa) and pravartini means guide. This means that She is the guiding factor of Śiva, the Supreme. This nāma once again confirms Her Brahmanic status.

844. छन्दःसारा
Chandas means meter, the study of poetic meter and the art of versification known as metrical science. Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (I.i.5) says that chandas is secular knowledge (aparā). Parā knowledge is spiritual. Sārā means the substance or essence or marrow or heart or essential part of anything, best part, etc. Rig Veda (X.xiv.16) says “All the sacred meters, the tristubh (heaven), the gāyatrī (earth) and the remaining ones converge in the Lord of Cosmic Order.” Chandas depends upon the number of letters in a word of a verse. Chandas also mean the Vedic hymns. The essence or the essential parts of Vedas are Upaniṣads. This nāma says that She is well established in Upaniṣads. Gāyatrī chandas is considered as the most important of all chandas. Varivasyā rahasya (I. 6, 7) says “Fourteen Vidyās have been declared to be expedients in this world to understand Her. Even among them the most essential are the Vedas and therein Gāyatrī. She has two forms. One is recited in four Veda-s and other (Śrī Vidyā) is not clear, being esoteric.” Therefore, it is apparent that Pañcadaśī mantra is superior than Gāyatrī (one recitation of Pañcadaśī mantra is equivalent to three recitations of Gāyatrī mantra), which is the form of all the four Vedas. Since, there is no differentiation between Her and Śrī Vidyā (Pañcadaśī), this nāma originated. This interpretation is further confirmed by another ancient tantric treatise Pingala Tantra, which discusses Śrī Cakra.

845. शास्त्रसारा
She is the essence of all śāstra-s. Brahma Sūtra (I.i.3) says śāstrayonitvāt. It says that Brahman is the source of scriptures. In other words, Vedas originated from the Brahman. This is because Vedas have all good qualities and cannot possibly originate from any other source, other than all-knowing Brahman. Yet another nāma that reconfirms Her Brahmanic status. Śāstra can be explained as an order, command, precept, rule, teaching, instruction, direction, advice, good counsel. It is also said to be any instrument of teaching, any manual or compendium of rules, any book or treatise, especially any religious treatise, any sacred book or composition of divine authority applicable even to the Veda, and said to be of fourteen or even eighteen kinds.

846. मन्त्रसारा
Mantra is the combination of bīja-s. Since She is Śabda Brahman and all the alphabets originate from Her. This nāma therefore says that She is the essence of all mantra-s. Please refer to nāma 204 sarva mantra svarūpiṇī. {Further reading on mantra-s: Mantra is of later classical Sanskrit tradition. They are said to be of traditional formulae whose value consists precisely in the fact that sages of the primeval past have handed it down. In Rig Veda alone, there are twenty one references to mantra. Mantra-s have the power and the source of that power is the truth and order that stands at the very centre of the Vedic universe. The pure power encapsulated in a mantra and released upon its utterance can work for or against whoever uses it. Should the user or beneficiary of mantra speak out of spite, malice or ignorance, the power unleashed by the even can be frightening, harmful, or even fatal. It is a tool of human intentionality and said to be protean. Mantra though is vital tool in the hands of humanity is also equally a troubling feature, as it is more often taken for granted. Mantra-s are of many types such as domestic mantra-s, sacrificial mantra-s, pūja mantra-s, devotional mantra-s, japa mantra-s and bīja mantra-s. The last two, if properly initiated and practiced will turn out to be highly potent.}

847. तलोदरी
She has slender waist. Nāma 35 also describes Her waist. There is another interpretation. If a अ is added to this nāma, it becomes atalodarī. When She assumes virāṭ form (nāma 778 virāṭ rūpā), Her waist becomes atala loka (one of the fourteen lokās of cosmography. Atala loka is eighth from the highest (purest).

848. उदारकीर्तिः
Her invigorated fame prevails everywhere. She also gives fame to Her devotees. She grants fame quickly if properly worshipped, devoid of ego. ud is a prefix to indicate superiority, a means all pervading, ara means swift and kīrti means fame. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (I.vi.7) says “He is called ud because he is above all weakness”. Her fame is compared to two famous lakes Ara and Nya in Brahma lokā. This is described in Chāndogya Upaniṣad (VIII.v.4) “When they attain the Brahma lokā (the abode of Brahman. This should not be construed as material plane. This is the place of no return for the soul as defined by Brahma sūtra (IV.iv.2) which says, ‘The soul attains liberation’) through silence (referred as brahmacharya in the Upaniṣad), they can freely move in all the worlds (omnipresence).

849. उद्दामवैभवा
Her glorification is not bound by limits. Dhāma means rope, which is used to bind materials. Her glory is beyond such bindings.

850. वर्णरूपिणी
She is in the form of letters. Please refer nāma 577 mātṛkā varṇa rūpiṇī. According to Śāmbhava School (Pāṇiniśikṣhā, a treatise on correct pronunciation of words in Veda-s, particularly Rig Veda), the number of alphabets is sixty four (possibly including some punctuations). She is said to be in the form of the sixty four alphabets referred here. Pāṇiniśikṣhā (verse 52) says that any mantra without proper pronounciation does not convey the intended meaning and instead it destroyus the one who recites with improper pronounciation. Janma-mṛtyu-jarā-tapta-jana-viśrānti-dāyinī जन्द्म-मत्ृयग-जरा-

851. जन्ममृत्युजरातप्तजनविश्रान्तिदायिनी
Living beings are afflicted by birth, old age and ultimate death. She provides solace to such beings. Solace is in the form of salvation. Salvation or liberations is different from mokṣa or the heaven. Heaven is only a temporary sojourn for the soul, which has to reenter earth for further births. A liberated soul is not born again as it merges with the Brahman. It loses its individual identity.

852. सर्वोपनिषदुद्घुष्टा
She is glorified in all the Upaniṣads. ud is used for implying superiority in place, rank or power and guṣṭā means announcing. This nāma says that all the Upaniṣads announce Her glory. Upaniṣads are the tools that impart knowledge. By attaining such knowledge one is able to realise the Brahman. Śaktī alone is capable of revealing the Brahman. Without Her aid, Śiva can never be realised. She takes Her devotes in front of Śiva for ultimately revealing Him to them. The blinding light and conflagration of the Brahman cannot be endured without Her grace. As Śri Mātā, She knows the extent to which Śiva can be revealed. Upaniṣads are the latter part of Vedas and deals with the Supreme knowledge. Upaniṣads are also known as jñāna kāṇḍa that imparts Supreme knowledge and is capable of revealing the Brahman. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (I.i.10) says “Knowledge and ignorance produce different results. Anything done with knowledge, with faith in teachers and in scriptures and according to the principles of the Upaniṣads is more fruitful.” The statement of Chāndogya Upaniṣad is endorsed by Brahma Sūtra (III.iii.1), which says ‘Any excogitation imparted in all the Upaniṣads on account of the sameness of injunction, etc.” The aphorism says that the main purport of Upaniṣads is to establish a connection with the Brahman. This nāma says that such vital connection between the Brahman and souls are established and maintained by Her.

853. शान्त्यतीतकलात्मिका
Śantyatīta is a kāla or time factor. Śantyatīta means transcending peace (Śanti). This is referred in navāvaraṇa pūja in the ninth āvaraṇa, applicable to those who are initiated into ṣodaśī mantra. This is the stage of jīvanmukti, (please refer notes at the end of nāma 764) the stage where avidyā has been totally destroyed by acquiring Supreme knowledge, referred to in the previous nāma. However, a trace of ignorance still prevails in this stage to undergo pains or pleasures of the balance in karmic account. But he continues to enjoy bliss, as he has already transcended duality. The next stage is liberation. Transcending the jīvan mukti stage is known as Śantyatīta kalā. She is said to be in that form.

854. गम्भीरा
She is abysmal. Gambhīrā also means reservoir. Śiva Sūtra (I.22) says “By uniting with the infinite reservoir of divine power (the pure consciousness), the power of Supreme I (the Brahman) is attained.” Her svātantra (independent energy derived from Śiva) form merges with Śiva or in other words, the Supreme consciousness merges with the Brahman. Therefore, what is to be explored is the divine reservoir. She is said to be that divine reservoir. This augurs well with the previous nāma-s as well. There is another interpretation for this nāma. Gaṁ (गीं) is Gaṇapati bīja, bhī (भ ) means fear and ra means drives away. The fear of Her devotees are driven away by making them worship Lord Gaṇeśa whose bīja is gaṁ.

855. गगनान्तस्था
The One who permeates the space. Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (III.9) says “The same Self fills the whole universe”. It also means the One (the Brahman) who prevails even after the dissolution of ākāś during the great deluge, also known as annihilation. Please refer nāma 571 mahā pralaya sākṣiṇī. Gagana means the ākāś. From ākāś, other elements originated (Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II.1). The bīja for ākāś is ha. The bīja-s for other elements (air, fire, water and earth) ya, ra, va, la also originated from ākāś. Therefore, it is said that She represents the five elements. The same Upaniṣad says “from the Brahman came space” which again confirms Her as the Brahman.

856. गर्विता
She is proud. She has so many reasons to be proud. The correct explanation would be that She is the embodiment of “I” consciousness or ahaṁ brahmāsmi or ‘I am That’ or such mahā vākya-s. In various nāma-s, it was found that She gives whatever She is endowed with. This nāma should be interpreted in the same manner. This should not be confused with ego that is associated with human mind, a deterrent factor to realisation. Nāma 508 is adi garvaitā (extremely proud) and 158 is nirmadā (devoid of proud).

857. गानलोलुपा
She is fond of songs. Shyāmala Dhandagam (4) says jaya saṅgīta priye. Jaya means victory and this means She is fond of songs that praise Her victories (like Devi Mahātmyam). She has a melodious voice, says Saundarya Laharī (verse 66). It says that the sweetness of the strings of vīṇā of Goddess Sarasvatī is nothing before the soft eulogistic melody of Lalitāmbikā.

858. कल्पनारहिता
Kalpana means formation of ideas and rahita means absent. She is devoid of approximations, as She is the endowment of Reality. When the ultimate Reality is known, there is no necessity for formation of ideas. There is another interpretation. This nāma is split into kalpa + nara + hita. Kalpa means pralaya or the deluge, nara means human beings and hita means friend. Even during annihilation of the universe, She holds in Her womb (possibly hiraṇya garbha or the golden egg), pious souls for recreation. Aṣṭāvakra Gīta (II.25) says “Amazingly, in the infinite ocean of Myself, the waves of life arise, meet, play and disappear naturally.” [For further reading on hiraṇya garbha: – The Brahman imparted Vedas to the first created being known as hiraṇyagarbha or the cosmic soul, whose limiting adjunct is the universal mind. In case a person is not able to realise the nirguna Brahman (Brahman without attributes) and realises only sagguṇa Brahman (with attributes), after death he reaches Brahmaloka, the highest level of cosmic order. From there he is not reborn into the mortal world, but lives in Brahmaloka for an infinite period of time and attains liberation with hiraṇyagarbha, the presiding deity of Brahmaloka. This process is explained in detail in Bhagavad Gīta VI.40-44.] {Further reading: Aṣṭāvakra Gīta (अष्टावक्रग ता) or the Song of Aṣṭāvakra, also known as Aṣṭāvakra saṃhitā is an Advaita Vedānta scripture which documents a dialogue between the Perfect Master Aṣṭāvakra and Janaka, the King of Mithila. Aṣṭāvakra Gīta states that there is no such thing as existence or non existence, right or wrong, or moral or immoral. In the eyes of the Aṣṭāvakra, one's true identity can be found by simply recognizing oneself as pure existence and that as individuals we are the Awareness of all things. Aṣṭāvakra Gīta teaches that one is already free once one realises one is free. It is in the form of conversation between two enlightened souls. It advocates non-action, the loss of desire and severing of worldly attachments. To free oneself from the cycle of life and death one should withdraw from all earthly desires and worries. To continue indulging in Earthly things even after one has realised their true nature is said to be foolish and time wasting. Instead it paints a picture of The Master as someone who continues to keep up their responsibilities in the world, not because they believe they have to or due to any worldly attachments, but simply that it is in their nature to do so. To avoid misinterpretation in this regard teachers traditionally recommend that Aṣṭāvakra Gīta be pursued by only those who have already advanced on the spiritual path.}

859. काष्ठा
Kaṭha Upaniṣad (I.iii.11) says “sā kāsṭhā sā parā gatiḥ” which means ‘That which is the limit of growth is also the highest goal attainable by anybody.’ (There is nothing higher than the Brahman, and that is the highest goal anybody can attain.) One’s goal should be from the gross to subtle. In this context this nāma means goal. Kāṣṭhā is time period consisting of 1.60 seconds. (One nimeṣa is equal to 0.088 seconds. One nimeṣa is equal to one blink of eye. Eighteen nimeṣa is equal to one Kāṣṭhā or 1.60 seconds.) One of the forms of Śiva is Bhīma, representing ether (element ākāś) and His wife is known as Kāṣṭhā. Kṛṣṇa explains to Arjuna (Bhagavad Gīta X.42) the ultimate goal “Suffice it to say that I stand bold this entire universe by a fraction of my yogic power.” That yogic power is Kāṣṭhā. The one, who realises this Kāṣṭhā is known as Self-realized person. But the path to the goal is full of thorns and hard to tread. It is like walking on razor’s edge, says Kaṭha Upaniṣad (I.iii.14).

860. अकान्ता
She is the destroyer of sins. Sins are destroyed by making one perform good karma-s. Nāma 167 pāpa-nāśinī and nāma 743 pāpāraṇya-davānalā convey the same meaning. Triśatī nāma-s 31 and 112 also convey the same meaning. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (XVIII.66) “Resigning all your duties to me, the all-powerful and all-supporting Lord, take refuge in Me alone. I shall absolve you of all sins, worry not.” Jesus Christ said “There is no man that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my sake and gospel’s. But he shall receive an hundred fold now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions; and in the world to come eternal life.” (Mark 10:29, 30) Nāma 329 is kāntā which said about Her vibrating and radiating beauty. Generally if ‘a’ is prefixed to a word, it means the opposite meaning of that word. But, this nāma is an exception like varadā (331) and avaradā (639).

861. कान्तार्धविग्रहा
She has half the body of Her husband Śiva. Kāntā means Śiva. This form is known as Ardhanārīśvara form, half-male and half-female. This form was very popular in ancient sculptures. This form means the creation. Male form is known as puruṣa and the female form is known as prakṛti. Creation is caused by the union of puruṣa and prakṛti Liṅga Purāṇa (I.iv.28) says “At the beginning of creation, Brahma had created a Being (Rudra) possessed of a body half man’s and half woman’s and then the Creator said “Divide thyself”. And He being accosted thus divided Himself into two. It was then that She was born.” Saundarya Laharī (verse 23) also refers to this form. The verse says that after having obtained the left half of Śiva’s body, She still remains unsatisfied. She is so fond of Śiva. Nāma 392 śrikanṭhārdha-śarīriṇi also refers to this form. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (III.xii.6) says “The glory of puruṣa (Śiva) is still greater. All creatures constitute one quarter of Him. The remaining three quarters are nectar in heaven.”

862. कार्यकारणनिर्मुक्ता
She is not subjected to cause and effect. Only the Brahman is devoid of cause and effect. Kṛṣṇa explains this in Bhagavad Gīta (III.22), “There is nothing in the three worlds for me to do, nor is there anything worth attaining, unattained by me, yet I continue to work.” (Some texts make a reference to Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (VI.8) saying “na tasya kāryaṃ karaṇaṃ ca vidyate”. What this Upaniṣad says is karaṇaṃ and not kāranaṃ. The Upaniṣad means ‘He has no body and no organs’. Some other texts interpret that karaṇaṃ and kāranaṃ are the same, meaning cause.) {Further reading on cause and effect: The twenty five tattva-s are broadly categorized into four groups based on their cause and effect on creation. The most important factor is mūlaprakṛti (nāma 397) which is the primeval form of prakṛti which is ‘not an effect’. Mūlaprakṛti is the primitive matter. Sāṃkhya sūtra (I.61) says “Primitive matter is the state of equipoise of three guṇa-s; from the primitive matter proceeds the ‘great one’ (the capacity of judging); from the great one the ‘egotistical organ’ (delusion); from the egotistical organ the five rudiments (five tanmatrā-s) and the two kinds of senses (faculties of action and faculties of perception); then follow the gross elements (ākāś, air, fire, water and earth). These together with soul form the series of twenty five (tattva-s).” The next is ‘cause and effect’ which includes intellect and ego out of antaḥkaraṇa and five tanmatrā-s or cognitive faculties viz. sound, touch, sight, taste and smell (totalling seven). These are classified as cause and effect because they originated from other causes and they in turn cause other effects. Thus, they become both cause and effect. For example, intellect is the product of prakṛti. Intellect in turn produces ego and ego produces the five cognitive faculties. Thus, they become both cause and effect. The next category comprises only of ‘effects’ (totalling sixteen). They do not produce anything and they are jñānendriyā-s or cognitive senses viz. ear, skin, eye, tongue and nose (5), karmendriyā-s or organs of actions viz. mouth, feet, hands, organs of excretion and organ of procreation (5), five basic elements viz. ākāś, air, fire, water and earth (5) and the mind (1) (out of antaḥkaraṇa) thus making a total of 16. The third category is ‘no cause and no effect’. Puruṣa or soul alone comes under this category. Soul cannot manifest on its own. Soul can manifest only if it is associated with prakṛti. Thus from mūlaprakṛti the rest twenty four tattva-s originate, thereby unfolding creation. Some are of the view that antaḥkaraṇa includes only mind, intellect and ego thereby excluding consciousness. In that case, twenty five tattva-s are calculated as twenty (five elements, etc) + antaḥkaraṇa 3 + puruṣa or soul + prakṛti.}

863. कामकेलितरङ्गिता
She overflows with joy in the presence of Śiva. Kāma means Śiva. She is full of such joy as narrated in nāma 376 śringāra-rasasampūrṇā meaning essence of love. Love is one of the important attributes of Lalitāmbikā. This nāma refers to Her conjugal bliss that She derives while with Śiva that flows like waves (waves are known for their quick succession).

864. कनत्कनकताटङ्का
She is wearing glittering ear studs made of shining gold. Saundarya Laharī (verse 28) says that it is due to the power of Her tāṭaṅkā (ear studs), Śiva becomes deathless, even after swallowing the terrible poison. It is also said that sun and moon are Her ear studs. Ānanda Laharī (verse 16) says, “To the killer of Manmatha (meaning Śiva), the vehicle is an old bullock. Poison is His food. The directions are His dress. Burning ghat is His playground. The ornaments are poisonous snakes. Oh! Mother! Despite all these, if He still retains His Iśvara status, it is only because of Your greatness, saubhāgya.”

865. लीलाविग्रहधारिणी
She takes different forms, just like child's play. This nāma talks about the ease with which She takes different incarnations. Nāma-s 401 and 824 discuss the same subject. Kṛṣṇa dwells at length, the reason for attaining various forms. “Though birthless and deathless, and the Lord of all beings, I manifest myself through my own yogamāyā” (Bhagavad Gīta IV.6). “Whenever righteousness is on the decline, and unrighteousness is in the ascensive, then I body myself forth.” (Bhagavad Gīta IV.7). “For the protection of the virtuous, for the extirpation of evil doers, and for establishing Dharma on a firm footing, I am born from age to age.” (Bhagavad Gīta IV.8, the famous Sanskrit verse is produced below.) paritrāṇāya sādhūnāṃ vināśāya ca duṣkṛtām| dharma-saṃsthāpanārthāya sambhāvami yuge yuge|| पररिाणाय साधूनाींववनाशाय च दष्गकृताम।् धमु-सींस्थापनाथाुय समभावलम यगगेयगगे॥ Līlā also refers to a Character in Yoga Vāsiṣṭha (second story in Utpatti Prakaraṇa). By Her penance Goddess Sarasvatī appeared before Her and answers Līlā’s questions on Realisation.

866. अजा
She is unborn. Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (IV.5) explains this state. Prakṛti is described in the Upaniṣad as aja. Though it (prakṛti) changes its form, It is without birth and without beginning.

867. क्षयविनिर्मुक्ता
She is free from decay. Decay here means death. When there is no birth, there is no death. Brahman is beyond birth and death as everything originates from Him. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (II.27) “death is certain for the born and rebirth is inevitable for the dead.” Since She is the Brahman, She is devoid of birth and death. This nāma also means that one need not go to isolated places to perform penance to realise Her. (This contradicts Bhagavad Gīta VI.9). True devotion is the only requirement to attain Her. It is also said that only Her devotees attain both material prosperity and total liberation (as narrated in uttara bhāg of this Sahasranāma).

868. मुग्धा
She is beautiful. Mugdhā also means innocent. Innocence is a quality that lacks intent to injure others. She being Śrī Mātā, She cannot injure Her children. Quality of innocence makes Her beautiful. She is beautiful because “She is the creator of appearance of selfpower, the amazing svātantrya śaktī of Śiva.” (Tantraloka I.71) Other nāma-s that narrate Her beauty are 48 and 462.

869. क्षिप्रप्रसादिनी
Kṣipra means quickly. It is said that salvation is delayed if other gods are worshipped. But if She is worshipped, salvation is attained in this birth itself. To prove this point, Her mantra-s like mahā ṣodaśī are said to give salvation in this birth itself. It is called mokṣa sādana, path to liberation. This is because, She is not different from Śiva, the Brahman and She alone is capable of taking a true devotee to Śiva. It is also said that prayers, japa and oblations performed without continuity makes one eligible for salvation in the next birth (because of lack of continuity, salvation gets postponed to the next birth). Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (XVI.6) “The divine gift is conducive to liberation.” The divine gift is attained through pure devotion. {Further reading on mokṣa: The bīja sauḥ (सैः) is known as amṛta bīja. The one, who fixes his constant attention on this bīja for forty eight minutes, brings under his control the entire multitude of mantra-s and mudra-s. If he continues this practice for nine hours, all gods and goddesses come to him and offer him moksha. (Parātrīśikā-vivaraṇa 9-18)}

870. अन्तर्मुखसमाराध्या
She is worshipped by those who look within. She has to be realized by internal search and exploration. This is based on the theory that Ātman resides within. {Further reading: Kṛṣṇa explains the concept of looking within exhaustively in Bhagavad Gīta Chapter VI consisting of 47 verses and a gist of which is reproduced here as explained by Swami Chinmayananda. Karma yoga practiced without regard to the fruits of actions, form an external aid to better meditation. The process by which lower is brought under the direct management and discipline of the higher are all together called spiritual techniques. No Guru can take the responsibility; no scripture can promise this redemption; no altar can, with its divine blessing make the lower the higher. The lower mist necessarily be trained slowly and steadily to accept and under the influence of the discipline of the higher. When a seeker has come in his life to the state explained as yogārūdāḥ, and when in that state of equipoise, the mind is held steadfast in the contemplation of the Supreme, the self-controlled one, in all serenity is capable of maintaining his consistency on meditation in all circumstances, favourable and adverse, at all levels of his personality. In the right understanding of his own self and the resulting realisation of his own Self, he becomes Self everywhere. To him, who has realised himself to be Self which is all-pervading, the entire universe becomes his own Self, and therefore, his relationship with every other part of the universe is equal and the same. For this the seeker should try to withdraw himself from his mental and physical preoccupations.}

871. बहिर्मुखसुदुर्लभा
Previous nāma conjoins with this nāma to declare the process of Self-realisation. She is very difficult to attain for those who are not able to look within. Mind is the prime factor to look within. Unless senses are controlled, it is difficult to control the mind. This nāma says that She cannot be attained only by external means. Saundarya Laharī (verse 95) says “It is difficult for those who have not controlled their senses to attain you.” Kaṭha Upaniṣad (II.i.2) also explains this. “Immature people run after external objects and they invariably get caught in the widespread net of death. Wise people, however, know where true immortality is. That is why they reject everything in this world, knowing that these things are short lived.” This nāma says that She cannot be attained by those who continue to be addicted to sensory pleasures. Addiction is different from necessity. Nāma 188 is durlabhā. Durlabhā means difficult and su-durlabha means very difficult.

872. त्रयी
Trayī means three and here it refers to three Veda-s, Rig, Yajur and Sāma. In fact, She is revered as the mother of Veda-s (nāma 338 Veda jañanī. This nāma says that She is in the form of three Vedas. Śrī Śaktī Mahimnaḥ Stotram of sage Durvāsa (verses 5, 6 and 7) offers an explanation for this nāma. vāgbhava bīja aiṁ (ऐीं) is the seed of Veda-s. Rig Veda begins with the letter a अ, Yajur Veda begins with the letter i इ and Sāma Veda also begins with the letter a अ. अ + इ + अ (a + i + a = ऐ. If a bindu is added to ऐ (i) it becomes ऐीं (iym). It is the light ऐीं that illuminates all the mantra-s and tantras. This vāgbhava bīja in turn gives rise to fifty one (or fifty as the case may be) alphabets, distributed amongst eight Vāc Devi-s, the authors of this Sahasranāma giving rise to words. Hence, vāgbhava bīja is called the seed of Veda-s. This can also be considered as the vāgbhava kūṭa, the first kūṭa of Pañcadaśī.

873. त्रिवर्गनिलया
Trivarga means past, present and future or dharma, artha and kāma (three of the four puruṣārtha, mokṣa is the other one). Since She is the provider of mokṣa, this nāma says that She prevails in other puruṣārtha-s. It can also be said that She prevails in all three factors of time, past, present and future. Nāma 760 trivarga dhatrī conveys the same meaning.

874. त्रिस्था
This is a recapitulation of the previous nāma. This nāma says that She is present in all the triads. There are many triads. Past, present and future; Brahma, Viṣṇu and Rudra; Creation, sustenance and dissolution; the three letters of ॐ a, u and m; the three types of karma-s prārabdha, sañcita āgāmya or kriyamāṇa; three guṇa-s – sattva, rajas and tams; icchā, jñāna and kriyā śaktī-s, etc. Mārkaṇḍeya Purāṇa (21.36 – 38) says “In you reside the three mātra-s of time (short, long and medium), O Goddess, all that exists and does not exist, the three worlds, the three Veda-s, the three sciences, the three fires, the three lights, three colours, the three qualities, the three sounds and the three āśrama-s, (house holder, anchorite and sannyās) the three times and the three states of life, the three types of pitṛ-s (Vasu, Rudra and Āditya), day-night and the rest. This trinity of standards in your form Oh! Goddess Sarasvatī.” {For further reading: When the third person (nara or a human being), the second person (Śaktī) and the first person (Śiva) are used together, simultaneously there is the absorption of the lower in the higher and higher because it is the higher that contains the truth of the lower. This means that Śiva aspect prevails in Śaktī aspect and Śaktī aspect prevails in nara aspect. Thus Śiva aspect prevails all over. Nara-rūpa (rūpa means form) first rises to Śaktī rūpa and then to Śiva rūpa. Nara rūpa cannot rise to Śiva rūpa, leaving aside the intervening Śaktī rūpa. This is the reason that Śiva always addresses Devi in the second person. This is known as Trika philosophy. Śiva is known as prakāśa, Śaktī is known as vimarśa and their sāmarasya (equipoise) is known as identity in difference, the living beings.)

875. त्रिपुरमालिनी
Tripuramālinī is the presiding deity of sixth āvaraṇa of Śrī Cakra, known as sarva rakṣāakara (the Supreme Protector). She is assisted by other yogin-s known as nirgarbha-yogini-s (not born from wombs). This āvaraṇa represents sṛṣṭi (creation). Mālini is also known as wife of Kāma (Śiva). Tripura could also mean three primary stages of consciousness (awake, dream and deep sleep). In this context this nāma means that She rules over the initial three stages of consciousness. The ultimate level of consciousness is Śiva. There is one more stage of consciousness. This stage occurs immediately after one falls asleep and before entering his dream state. This is the stage when divine commune happens. This state also happens just before getting up in the morning. One can find answers for his spiritual queries during this state directly from God.

876. निरामया
She is devoid of diseases. Maya means medical treatment for diseases. Diseases are of two types; one pertains to the body and the other affecting the mind. She is beyond body and mind. She is the remedy to all diseases as indicated in nāma 551 sarva-vyādhipraśamanī which means She cures all diseases.

877. निरालम्बा
She is without support and everything is supported by Her. This nāma says that She is not dependent on anybody for actions of creation, sustenance and dissolution. She does not depend upon Śiva, as there is no difference between Her and Śiva.

878. स्वात्मारामा
She rejoices in Her own Self. Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (I.iv.3) says “He was not at all happy. People are not happy when alone. He desired a mate. He became as big as man and wife, embracing each other. He parted this very body into two. From that came husband and wife. Therefore, this (body) is one-half of oneself, like one of the two halves of a split pea. Therefore, this space is indeed filled by the wife. He was united with her. From that men were born.” Brahman divides Himself into two Śiva and Śaktī or static and kinetic energies. The Upaniṣad confirms that Śaktī was created by Śiva. This goes to prove that Śiva and Śaktī are not different from each other (nāma 53. Śiva). They are only a unified entity with multiple functions. Śiva does not partake in any of these functions and simply watches the ongoing activities duly administered by Śaktī. Śaktī functions independently. Her independent nature is discussed in previous nāma-s. Śiva is the sole possessor of Śaktī. The entire phenomenal manifestation is the varied form of His svātantrya śaktī (nāma 723), the sovereign autonomy. This is also known as freedom of will, held by vimarśa form of the Brahman. It is also said that the creation was made from Her mind and at the time of annihilation, the universe is dissolved into Her mind. The universe is said to be Her playground. Since the universe was created from Her mind, Her own Self (Her own mind) has become Her playground. Please refer nāma 665 ekākinī.

879. सुधास्रुतिः / सृतिः
She is the cause for the flow of nectar that was discussed in nāma 106 sudhā sārābhi varṣiṇī and 240 candramaṇḍala madhyagā. The details have been provided in the above nāma-s. When kuṇḍalinī reaches ājñā cakra, it is endowed with rattling energy that normally radiates and gets diffused through either ājñā cakra itself, or back head cakra or sahasrāra. The diffusion of energy is a normal phenomenon. Alternatively, one can concentrate on the pineal gland just behind the ājñā cakra. However, this practice could cause nerve related problems, if done without guidance. When this gland is energised, it causes illumination. At the time of this illumination, one can feel the flow of nectar in the region of upper palate and throat. This region is called soft palate (inner tongue). Normally, this is felt when one enters blissful state. Since kuṇḍalinī is Her subtlest form, this nāma says that She is responsible for the flow of this divine nectar.

880. संसारपङ्कनिर्मग्नसमुद्धरणपण्डिता
She is capable of rescuing men who are entangled in saṃsāra. Saṃsāra means materialistic life. It is said that those who always think about Her, do not get entangled in materialistic life; instead they lead spiritual life. Saṃsāra originates from the word saṃsārin which can be explained as the transmigratory soul passing through various mundane states in the form of various sentient beings. Saṃsāra should not be confused with the life of householder (grahasthya). A man cannot perform fire rituals without his wife and this is prohibited in śastra-s. Kṛṣṇa says “Arjuna! I speedily deliver from the ocean of birth and death, their mind being fixed on me.” (Bhagavad Gīta XII.7)

881. यज्ञप्रिया
She is fond of sacrifices. In yājña, oblations are offered to different gods and goddesses to appease them. The navāvaraṇa pūja itself is considered as a sacrificial ritual. yājña also means Viṣṇu. It is said that yājñovai Viṣṇu which means yājña is Viṣṇu. In this context it can be explained that She is fond of Viṣṇu Her brother. Kṛṣṇa says (Bhagavad Gīta IV.24 and 25) “The process of offering and oblation itself, both are Brahman. The fire and the one who makes oblation into it are other forms of Spirit. By realising this, being absorbed in Brahman during all activities, verily such a one goes to Spirit alone. Yogis duly offer sacrifice only in the shape of worship to gods. Others pour into the fire of Brahman the very sacrifice in the shape of the self (individual endowed with ego) through the sacrifice known as the perception of identity.” Yajur Veda (III.v.11) and Rig Veda (I.164.50) say yajñena yajñamayajanta devāḥ which means ‘by the sacrifice the gods worshipfully performed the sacrifice.” (This forms the beginning of the last mantra of puruṣa sūkta.) {Further reading on yājña: (in the words of Dayananda Sarasvati as appearing in Rig Veda Samhita) Yājña is not merely a sacrificial ritual. It embraces all the achievements on a social plane to amend the conditions of our worldly living against poverty, miseries, sickness and disease and in the subsequent stage to assure a better future even beyond death. It is not the ritual that would lead to that goal, it is the hard, honest and sincere devotion in all department of knowledge – science, technology, philosophy and spirituality, that would assure the fruits of yājña.}

882. यज्ञकर्त्री
Yajña means sacrifice. She is in the form yajamānā’s wife. Yajamāna is the one who performs the yājña or for whom the yājña is performed, or who funds the yājña. Wife of yajamāna holds an important place in an yājña. She is known as yajamāna-patnī. In the house of yajamānā three kinds of fires are kept. They are gārhapatya also known as the domestic fire; the second is āhavanīya where oblations are offered; and the third one is dakṣiṇa or the southern fire. All the three fires are installed in altars made of clay. A person who maintains all the three fires is known as agnihotrin. Wife of yajamāna is also empowered to maintain gārhapatya fire during short absence of yajamāna. In an yājña, the performer is considered as Śiva Himself. His wife is Śaktī.

883. यजमानस्वरूपिणी
She is in the form of yajamāna. In the eight forms of Śiva, His Rudra form is the form of fire. Nāma 769 yājña-rūpa said that She is the yājña itself. Kṛṣṇa says (Bhagavad Gīta IX.24) “I am the enjoyer and also the Lord of all sacrifices.” In Viṣṇu Sahasranāma there are many nāma-s about yājña. {Further reading: The eight forms of Śiva are Sarva – earth; Bhava – water; Rudra – fire; Ugra – mind; Bhīma – ākāś; Paśupatī – soul; Īśāna – sun; and Mahādeva – moon.}

884. धर्माधारा
Dharma is the way of life, prescribed by scriptures. Dharma of one place may not suit the dharma of another place. The origin of the dharma is based on the cultural heritage and living conditions in a particular place. Dharma is explained as the way of life lived by those who were devoid of evil qualities and the way lived by sages and saints. Sages like Manu, Āpastamba, Parāśara, Nārada have explained dharma more or less in a unified voice. It is said that dharma, without following the prescribed guidelines does not yield desired results. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma uttara bhag (verse 17) says, ācāra prabhavo dharmo dharmasya prabhu acyutaḥ which means that dharma is primary in all śāstra-s. Ācāra means custom, practice, usage, tradition or immemorial usage as the foundation of law. Dharma arises out of customs and practice only. Dharma originates from ācāra and Lord of dharma is Viṣṇu or Acyuta. Mahānārāyaṇa Upaniṣad says that everything is established in dharma. This nāma says that She is in the form of Dharma.

885. धनाध्यक्षा
Dhanādhyakṣā is Kubera, the lord of wealth. Yakṣa-s are super human beings and generally considered as attendants of Kubera. Kubera is the chief of Yakṣa-s. He is one of Her twelve great worshippers. Since there is no difference between the worshipper and the worshipped, She is said to be the Lord of wealth.

886. धनधान्यविवर्धिनी
She is the increaser of wealth and granary. This happens automatically for Her true devotees.

887. विप्रप्रिया
Vipra means learned. She is fond of the learned and wise. Knowledge alone is needed for Self realisation.

888. विप्ररूपा
This is an extension of the previous nāma. After having said that She is fond of learned men, this nāma goes a step further and says that She is the embodiment of knowledge itself. A quality existing in the self is always liked. The one who is purified by certain rituals, knower of Vedas, knower of scriptures, follower of dharma and śāstra-s and the one who has controlled his mind and senses is known as brāhmaṇa. She makes such brāhmaṇa-s become more learned. A comparison is drawn between a cow and a brāhmaṇa. The cow is nourished by fodder and a brāhmaṇa is nourished by japa-s and homa-s (fire rituals). One of the primary duties of brāhmaṇa-s is to help others, by performing rituals for their upliftment. They should, by way of discourses impart knowledge to others. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (IV.13) “The four orders of the society were created by me, classifying them according to the mode of their prakṛti predominance.” Kṛṣṇa uses the order based classification in a number of places in Bhagavad Gīta. This order system is based on the predominance of guṇa-s, sattvic, rajas and tamas. If a person is highly sattvic in nature, it becomes one of the qualifications to become a brāhmana. The words of true brāhmaṇa -s are said to purify the sinners (possibly referring to the blessings of the learned, who are close to attaining the Brahman). They should not subject themselves to extolment, which could lead to egotism. If a brāhmaṇa is worshipped he turns out to be a milked cow. Brāhmaṇa -s do not mean a community, caste or creed. Brāhmana is a qualification based on the knowledge acquired and its quality. The one who is close to Brahman is a brāhmaṇa and his next stage is to merge with the Brahman.

889. विश्वभ्रमणकारिणी
Viśva means entirety and in this context all the universes or brahmāṇḍa-s (brahmāṇḍa-s mean more than one universe). There are many universes existing that are beyond human comprehension. Though universes are many, Brahman is One. She is always referred as akhilāṇḍakoṭi brahmāṇḍa nāyakī अणखलाण्डकोदट ब्रह्माण्ड नायकी which means that She is the creator of number of universes. She manifests as prakṛti by conjoining with puruṣa or soul in different universes. Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (I.i.1) opens by asking, “Is Brahman the cause of this universe? Where have we come from?” The same Upaniṣad answers this question at the end by saying (VI.1) “Some scholars think this world came into existence naturally. They are wrong. Some again think time created it. This too is wrong. The power of Brahman is manifested as this cycle.” Kṛṣṇa says (Bhagavad Gīta XVIII.61) “Brahman abides in the heart of all creatures, causing them to revolve according to their karma-s by His illusive power, seated as those beings are in the vehicle of the body.” Viṣṇu Sahasranāma first nāma is ‘Viśva’, conveying the same meaning as discussed above. This nāma means that She creates, sustains and dissolves the universes like cyclic motion. When a universe is created it has to be sustained to ultimately dissolve into Her.

890. विश्वग्रासा
She devours universes. This refers to Her act of dissolution. This has been discussed in nāma 752 māhāgrāsā and repeated here. Kaṭha Upaniṣad (I.ii.25) says “the best among all people are like food to the Self. Death overcomes everyone, yet even death is a mere condiment for the Self.” Brahma Sūtra (I.ii.9) also says “The eater (the Brahman) on account of the appropriation of all that moves and does not move.” She annihilates universes, as said in the previous nāma.

891. विद्रुमाभा
Vidrumā means coral coloured. Coral is red in colour, which is Her complexion. Vidrumā also means tree of knowledge. Tree is compared to knowledge, as several trees originate from a single tree. In the same way a guru produces several disciples. She is addressed as Guru in nāma -s 603, 713 and 722. She passes on the knowledge and wisdom to Her devotees like a tree producing many other trees.

892. वैष्णवी
She is in the power of Viṣṇu. Viṣṇu and Lalitāmbikā are said to be brother and sister. They both destroy demons, who cause trouble to virtuous men, they have the same types of weapons, etc. There are a lot of similarities between them. The next nāma explains further.

893. विष्णुरूपिणी
She is the form of Viṣṇu. There are other nāma-s in this sahasranāma that confirm that She is Viṣṇu’s form. Nāma-s 267, 298 and 838 convey the same meaning. Śaktī is the Divine potency. Kṛṣṇa calls this as yogamāyā. Kṛṣṇa says “Though birthless and deathless and the Lord of all beings, I manifest myself through my own yogamāyā keeping my nature (prakṛti) under control.” Nāma 339 is Viṣṇu māyā which says that She is the divine potency of Viṣṇu, the sustainer of the universe. The present nāma goes further and says that She is Viṣṇu. Śaktī (māyā) is the mirror in which the Brahman realises His own splendour. But this nāma does not say that She is māyā, as this has already been said in nāma 339. This nāma says that She is the sustainer of the universe, as Viṣṇu is known for sustainment. A number of epics draw comparisons between Viṣṇu and Devi.

894. अयोनिः
Yoni is generally used to indicate the divine procreative energy, also known as the source of origin. A-yoni means She is without origin. Yoni also means abode and a-yoni means She is without abode, which refers to Her omnipresence. The next nāma gives opposite interpretation.

895. योनिनिलया
Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (III.i.3) says, rukmacarṇaṁ kartāramīsaṁ puruṣaṁ brahmayonim. This means ‘the Brahman, the luminous Creator is the cause of Brahma, the hiraṇyagarbha or the Supreme Being.’ Therefore, brahmayonim means the Nature or prakṛti. Prakṛti is the cause for creation, when it is associated with the soul. Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (IV.11) also conveys the same message. It says Brahman presides over the source of everything. He sustains the world when it comes into being, and again when it perishes, it goes back into him. He controls everything. Brahma Sūtra (I.iv.27) also says “Brahman is declared to be the yoni (source)”. All these scriptures point out that the Creator is the source of origin, which is known as yoni, the material cause. This nāma says that She is the Creator. Saundarya Laharī (verse 11) while discussing about Śrī Cakra, subtly conveys the origin of the universe.

896. कूटस्था
Kūṭ means unintelligible which means ignorance, an influence of māyā. Ignorance is the outcome of indulging in saṁsāra (worldly affairs) and stha means occupied with or engaged in. Therefore, kūṭasthā means engaging in ignorance. This nāma says that She abides in ignorance! {Further reading on kūṭasthā: Brahman is reflected in countless facets of māyā or the innumerable individual ajñāna (unintelligible) also known as soul. Ignorance is the casual body of an individual. Under its spell the finite soul gets identified with mind and appears as the ego. Ego further identifies with sensory organs and becomes an individual being. The ego is always subjected to change. Behind this ever changing ego, the changeless Brahman shines as the immutable Self and this is known as kūṭasthā. When the individual soul functions as the experiencer (known as bhokta) and the doer (kartā), the immutable Self (kūṭasthā) stays behind as a witness (sākṣi) for all actions. The unchangeable Self is not affected by ignorance as it is only a witness and does not partake in both mental and physical actions. She is called as Kūṭasthā because She is not subjected to change. Changes occur only if associated with thoughts and actions. This is also known Kūṭastha caitanya or Kṛṣṇa consciousness or Christ consciousness.} Kṛṣṇa also refers to Kūṭasthā in Bhagavad Gita (XII.3). He says “Kūṭastha macalam dhruvam” which means changeless, constant and immovable (the Brahman).

897. कुलरूपिणी
Kula means noble, eminent or race or chief, etc. For śākta-s (worshippers of Śaktī are known as śākta-s) rights observed in Her worship is known as kula. It is also known as kaula, the philosophy and practice of left hand śākta-s. Kula also means mūlādhāra cakra. There are many nāma-s in this Sahasranāma beginning with kula such as 90 to 96 and 439 to 441 that discuss Her various kula forms. {Further reading on kaula-s: A kaula is himself a Guru. There are three divisions of kaula-s. The first category is supposed to be inferior who is always engaged in rituals such japa, pūja and homa. The mediocre one spends more time on meditation and reaches samādi stage. The superior kaula is a Self-realised person. He establishes a firm connection between Self and self. He is full of contentment, forgiveness and compassion} This nāma says She is in different forms discussed above.

898. वीरगोष्ठीप्रिया
Because of being vīra-mātā (nāma 836), She is fond of assembly of men with knowledge. Vīra also means overpower or subdue. Those who have overpowered their senses are known as warriors or vīra. Conquering senses is like fighting in a battle field. The victorious ones are called vīragoṣṭi (group of warriors).

899. वीरा
She is valorous. Her family is full of warriors. Her spouse Śiva, and Her sons Gaṇeśa and Kārttikeya are warriors. They have proved their valour while destroying demons (evil forces). Kṛṣṇa explains the qualities of a demonic person thus (Bhagavad Gīta XVI.4): “Hypocrisy, arrogance, pride, anger, sternness and ignorance are the marks of him who is born with demonic nature.” {Kṛṣṇa says in the next verse “The divine qualities bestow liberation and the demonic qualities lead to bondage.”) Viṣṇu Sahasranāma 658 is vīraḥ.

900. नैष्कर्म्या
She transcends karma. Law of karma applies to those who are perishable. She is the Lord who has implemented the theory of karma. Brahman is not afflicted with karma-s. Since She is the Brahman as deliberated in this Sahasranāma, She is not afflicted by karma-s. Karma does not affect a Self-realised person, as he knows that his self is not responsible for his acts. Kṛṣṇa confirms this in Bhagavad Gīta (V.10) by saying “He who acts, offering all actions to the Brahman and shaking off attachment, remains untouched by sin.” Kaivalya Upaniṣad (II.3) says “I am devoid of both virtues and sins”. This is the unique quality of the Brahman. Sage Patañjali in his Yoga Sūtra (I.24) says “Īśvara (the Brahman) is a special Puruṣa untouched by misery, actions, their results and desires.” (The previous aphorism says how to realise this: “by devotion to Īśvara.”)

901. नादरूपिणी
Apart from what is explained in nāma 299, nāda-rūpā, nāda also refers to the first movement of Śiva-Śaktī towards manifestation. The subtle sound is experienced in the spinal cord (suṣumna), when the Śaktī fills the universe with nādānta. Here She is known as Nāda, the unmanifest from of sound. At the highest level of nāda, vāc (speech) does not carry any denotation. At this stage, there is no difference between the designator and the designated. ॐ represents this nāda form of Śabda Brahman. The practitioner should learn to visualise nāda as luminous entity existing in his heart. This luminosity symbolises the nature of the Supreme knowledge that is required to realise the Brahman. This is the primary reason for avouching that Śaktī alone can reveal Śiva (nāma 727 Śiva- jñāna-prādinī). In one of the best treatises of Śaktī, the kāmakalāvilāsā (verse 10) it is said ‘from nāda-bindu originates the entire world’. This is confirmed in Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (I.i.7) which says, “akṣarāt sambhavatīha viśvam” which means ‘from akṣara (Śabda Brahman) the universe originates.’ This nāma affirms that She is the Śabda Brahman, the creator of the universe. Śabda Brahman means primeval orphic sound. {Further reading: Śiva Purāṇa says that ॐ has several components. Apart from others, ॐ has several types of Liṅga-s (a form of Śiva). Liṅga Purāṇa explains the origin of Liṅga (I.16). ‘It was for both Brahma and Viṣṇu a brilliant Liṅga manifested Itself in the ocean. It had thousands of clusters of flames. It had neither beginning, nor an end and nor a middle. It was incomparable, inexplicable and indistinct. It was the source of the universe. There is a story that both Brahma and Viṣṇu wanted to find out the beginning and end of this Liṅga. There are several types of Liṅga-s and the subtle Liṅga is known as sūkṣma-praṇava (sūkṣma means subtle). In addition to the subtle Liṅga, there are many types of gross Liṅga-s. Svayambhu Liṅga is identified with bindu. Svayambhu means self existent. Śiva Purāṇa (I.16.113) says, nādaliṅga svayambhuvaḥ.}

902. विज्ञानकलना
Vijñāna means knowledge that is required to realise the Brahman and kalanā means causing or effecting. This nāma is an extension of nāma 727 Śiva-jñāna-pradāyinī. She is endowed with knowledge as per nāma 643 Jñānadā. This nāma says that She provides the highest knowledge to realise the Brahman. There are fourteen types of vidyā-s. They are, the four Veda-s (1 – 4), the six limbs of Veda-s (7 – 12) ( Śikṣā, Chandas, Vyākaraṇa, Nirukta, Jyotiṣa and Kalpa), Mīmāṃsā (profound thought or reflection or Consideration, investigation, examination, discussion. Examination of Vedic texts divided into two systems, viz. the Pūrva-mīmāṃsā or Karma-mīmāṃsā by Jamini and the Uttara-mimāṃsā or Brahma-mimāṃsā or Śārīrakamimāṃsā by Bādarāyaṇa, commonly styled the Vedānta and dealing chiefly with the nature of Brahma or the one universal Spirit), Nyāya (13) (a logical or syllogistic argument or inference consisting of a combination of enthymeme and syllogism (enthymeme is argument consisting of only two propositions, an antecedent and consequent deduced from it; a syllogism with one premise omitted) and so having, according to the Naiyāyika-s five numbers, viz. pratijñā, hetu, udāharaṇa, upanaya, nigamana, or according to the Vedāntin-s three numbers. This system of philosophy delivered by Gotama or Gautama. It is one of the six darśana-s, so called, because it goes into all subjects, both physical and metaphysical, according to the above syllogistic method treated in one division of the system. Its branch is called Vaiśeṣika.) and purāṇa-s (14) or epics are the fourteen vidyā-s. It is said that knowing all these fourteen vidyā-s is known as vijñāna.

903. कल्या
Kalya has many meanings such as auspicious, healthy, perfect, ready or prepared, instructive, dawn, good tidings, etc. It can be said that She is in the form of above qualities. Triśatī nāma 146 is also Kalyā. It is said that She is well versed in arts. She is the embodiment of kalā-s as per nāma 797.

904. विदग्धा
She is clever, shrewd, knowing, sharp, crafty, sly, artful, intriguing, etc. These qualities are required to create, sustain and dissolve the universe. These are the qualities of the Brahman and this nāma again reaffirms Her Brahmanic qualities.

905. बैन्दवासना
Baindava means a bindu or dot and āsana means seat. This nāma says that She is seated on a bindu. There are two types of explanations for bindu. The central point of Śrī Cakra is called bindu. It is placed in the midst of the inner most (top most in the case of Meru) triangle. This bindu is called sarvānandamaya cakra, also known as baindava sthāna. The presiding deity of this ninth āvaraṇa or covering is Śrī Mahā Tripurasundarī (nāma 997). She is worshipped here with yoni mudra. Those who are initiated into ṣodaśī should worship Her here with trikhaṇḍā mudra. Lalitāmbikā is worshipped here in Her highest form. She is adored as Parābhaṭṭārikā (bhaṭṭāra means highly noble, worthy of worship) and Mahā-kāmeśvarī. In kāmakalā (please refer nāma 322) there are three bindu-s. They are white, red and multi coloured. The white bindu represents Śiva and the red bindu represents Śaktī. They expand and contract thereby causing the creation of the universe. The multicoloured bindu represents the sun. Kāma refers to the sun and kalā refers to the red and white bindu-s. All the three put together is called kāmakalā (nāma 322). The red and white bindu-s are the Divine couple. Their union happens in equal degree. As already discussed in various nāma-s, Śiva is prakāśa form and Śaktī is vimarśa form. When prakāśa and vimarśa unite, the union is known as ahaṃkāra or ego. The ahaṃkāra consists of many alphabets which subsequently produce sound and its meaning. Since She is seated on the bindu (red coloured), this nāma calls Her Baindavāsanā, the Creative aspect of the Brahman. The three bindu-s can be compared to the three nāḍi-s, iḍā, piṅgala and suṣumna. When the energies transported through these nāḍi-s merge in the bindu in the ājñā cakra, the practitioner transcends individual consciousness and enters universal consciousness. The meeting point of the three nāḍi-s is known as bindu and She is said to be seated here. A practitioner enters the universal consciousness, when his soul, individual consciousness and mind unite at this bindu point.

906. तत्त्वाधिका
She is beyond tattva-s or principles (generally tattva-s are twenty four or thirty six). Please refer nāmā 424.

907. तत्त्वमयी
This is the continuation of the previous nāma. This nāma says that She is the embodiment of tattva-s. Tattva-s can be explained as the real essence or the ultimate principle underlying the phenomenal creation. A self realised person is called tattvadarśin which means the truth has been revealed. Knowledge about tattva-s is known as darśana, meaning spiritual revelation. Tattva-s are also known as bāhyakaraṇa (eternal tools or the breakdown of five basic elements ākāś, air, fire, water and earth) as opposed to antaḥkaraṇa (internal tools comprising of mind, intellect, consciousness and ego). The five basic elements break down into tattva-s comprising of organs of perception, cognitive faculties, organs of action and action faculties. These are the twenty tattva-s. Antaḥkaraṇa, which consists of four tattva-s make the total of twenty four tattva-s, known as ātma tattva-s. Vidyā tattva (consisting of another six tattvas) and Suddha Vidyā tattva (consisting of four tattva-s) make another ten tattva-s. The most superior tattva-s are Śaktī tattva and Śiva tattva. All these make thirty six tattva-s. This nāma says that She is the embodiment of these tattva-s. She is asserted as the Brahman through various nāma-s of this Sahasranāma. The primary quality of the Brahman is omnipresence. Tattva-s relate to prakṛti. Since She is Brahman as well as prakṛti, this nāma says that She is the personification of tattva-s. The previous nāma said that She is beyond tattva-s. Brahman does not get Himself associated with any actions. The previous nāma, considering Her as the Brahman says that She is beyond tattva-s and this nāma treating Her as prakṛti says that She is the embodiment of tattva-s. Please refer nāma 991 for further details.

908. तत्त्वमर्थस्वरूपिणी
Tat means the Brahman and tvam means the soul. The union of the two is called realisation or Self-realisation. This nāma says She is in the form of mahā vākya (the great sayings or the great pronouncements)such as Tat tvaṁ asi or “You are That”. Her tattvaṁ form is the cause for Self-realisation. Without Her grace the explanation for Tat tvaṁ asi is not possible to comprehend. Tat tvaṁ asi is the articulation of Chāndogya Upaniṣad (VI.viii.7). The Upaniṣad says “That which the subtlest of all is the Self. ‘tat satyaṁ’ That is the truth, ‘saḥ ātma’ that is the Self, ‘Tat tvaṁ asi’ that is you.” The Upaniṣad affirms that Self, the essence of pure spirit is the real identity of the Self.

909. सामगानप्रिया
Sāma means the Sāma Veda, gāna means songs and priyā means fond of. This nāma says that She is fond of songs of Sāma Veda, or She is fond of those who render Sāma Veda,. The verses of Sāma Veda, are rendered in musical notes. It is said that Śiva is fond of Sāma Veda. Rāvaṇa of Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa got boons from Śiva by praising Him in Sāma Veda. This is said in Vālmīkin Rāmāyaṇa (uttara kāṇḍa.XVI.34): “Daśānana glorified Śiva by singing psalms from Sāma Veda.” Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (X.22) “Among Veda-s, I am the Sāma Veda.” Chāndogya Upaniṣad (I.vi.1) establishes firm connection between Rig Veda and Sāma Veda. “The earth is like Rig Veda and fire is like Sāma Veda. The Sāma is based on the Rig Veda and this is why the Sāma is sung based on the Rig Veda. The earth is sā and fire is ama which together make Sāma.” Chāndogya Upaniṣad and Kena Upaniṣad are the important Upaniṣads that belong to Sāma Veda. {Further reading on Sāma Veda: Sāma Veda samhita has two parts. The first part contains text of the rik mantra-s that are to be sung. The second part is the texts of mantra-s which are actually sung. Thus every mantra in the first part is expanded to yield one or more sāmangāna mantra-s. There are said to be 1875 mantra-s in Sāma Veda. Śikṣā, a branch of Veda, deals with the science of proper articulation and pronunciation of Vedic texts. It is further classified into varṇa, svara, mātra, balam, sāma and santāna respectively representing syllable, accent, duration, effort, even tone and continuity and text. A typical rik of Sāma Veda is given here. The figures above the alphabets mean that the particular alphabet should be repeated that many times. १ is numeric 1, २ is numeric 2 and ३ is numeric 3. १ ३ १ २ ३ २ १ ३ २ ३ २ १ अगनेआ यादह व तये गगणानो ह्य दातये

910. सौम्या
This nāma is also pronounced as soumyā (सौमया). The word soma refers to Śiva with His consort Umā, who forms a part of Śiva. This has been already discussed in nāma 392. Somyā also means ‘resembling the moon’, auspicious, happy, pleasant, cheerful, etc. All these characteristics apply to Her. The nāma also means that She is worthy of adoration through soma sacrifice (soma yāga). {Further reading on Soma yāga: The śrauta sūtra-s (for example Āpastamba Śrauta Sūtra-s) of the late Vedic period offer several definitions of ritual known as śrauta sūtra. The main components of the rituals are oblations (different substances offered into the fire), the deity (oblations are offered to the deity who is invoked in the fire) and the renunciation (renouncing the benefits accruing on account of the ritual). The śrauta rituals consist of three main categories. They are haviryajñā also known as iṣṭi, the purported animal sacrifices and soma rituals. There are many restrictions for performing soma yāga. One has to be married and the soma yāga should come through lineage. Soma is a sacred plant that is grown in high mountains and juice is extracted from the plants and offered as oblations. The principle characteristic of soma yāga is the sequence of chants from Sāma Veda, sung in chorus by three priests.}

911. सदाशिवकुटुम्बिनी
The consort of Sadāśiva or belonging to the family of Sadāśiva (Śiva). Lalitā triśatī 231 is also Sadāśiva. Sadāśiva is a principle or tattva, the pure element of Śiva, where one experiences the universe in an undifferentiated way, as the limbs of his own body of ‘I’ consciousness. In other words when one feels ahaṁ idaṁ or ‘I am this universe’ that stage is called Sadāśiva. There are five final elements in the path of Self realisation. They are (in the ascending order) suddha vidyā, Īśvara, Sadāśiva, Śaktī and finally Śiva, the Supreme.

912. सव्यापसव्यमार्गस्था
This nāma is composed of three words, savya + apa-savya + mārga. Savya means right hand, apa-savya means the left hand and mārga means path (possibly referring to middle path between savya and apasavya). Savya is worshipping through Vedic methods, where only right hand is used to perform rituals. Apasavya is worshipping through tantric methods, where only left hand is used. This nāma says that She is worshipped by Her devotees by either of these paths. These are also known as dakṣiṇā mārga and vāma mārga. The important difference between the worshippers following dakṣiṇā or vāma mārga is the object of worship. Dakṣiṇā mārga followers worship all gods and goddesses. In Hindu philosophy, all energy generating objects are worshipped. For example, water, fire, earth, sun, moon, planets, rivers, oceans are worshipped as demigods. Such demigods and goddesses are important factors in sustaining the universe. However trivial the nature of these gods and goddesses are, they have their own role to play in sustaining the universe. In dakṣiṇā mārga, all these demigods and goddesses are worshipped and they are easily pleased when pūja and homa (fire rituals) are performed to assuage them. Though the followers of dakṣiṇā mārga have their own iṣṭa devatā (favourite or desired deity), they also worship other gods and demigods. Iṣṭa devatā is different from kula devatā. Kula devatā is the deity worshiped through one’s lineage. Śāstra-s say that one’s kula devatā should be worshipped as frequently as possible, at least once in a year. Iṣṭa devatā is one’s preferred form of God. Since they invoke all demigods and goddesses, who have their own powers, they bless the invoker and make him prosper. On the other hand, vāma mārga worshippers do not worship other gods and goddesses. They always worship their own devatā, in whose worship they should have been initiated by a guru. These worshippers ignore other devatā totally. Though the particular devatā (mostly feminine deities), who is invoked by them endows her worshippers with all her qualities, she does not confer final liberation. Though they also occasionally worship other deities, they invariably sacrifice the benefits of such worships to their own devatā, as they feel that their own devatā will confer on them the blessings of all other devatā-s. It is said in Sandhyāvandana, sarva deva namaskāraḥ śrī keśavaṁ prati gacchati (सवु देव नमस्कारः ि के शवीं प्रनत गच्छनत) which means that the propitiation done to other devatā-s reach only Viṣṇu (keśava). They are deluded to recognise the individual powers of other gods and goddesses. They firmly believe that their own deity can bestow on them the energy of sun, fire, water, etc. They do not make any progress from their iṣṭa devatā to realise the Brahman, the Ultimate. Their ultimate liberation gets postponed on account of their inability to realise the Brahman. In their affinity to their own deity, they fail to perform rituals for their ancestors, riṣi-s and sages, etc. There are five types of yajñā as referred in nāma 946. If one fails to perform these pañca yajñā , path to salvation is blocked. This means, he has to be reborn again to cross this blockade. The final liberation gets postponed for them. In this context this nāma says that She is worshipped by both dakṣiṇā mārga and vāma mārga. There is another interpretation. A soul, after leaving its gross body can go to the deva loka (where gods like Indra, etc live) or pitṛ loka (where ancestors live) depending upon the karma embedded in the soul. Savya is the name of the path that a soul takes in reaching deva loka. This path is full of illumination. The soul transcends the five basic elements and reaches higher planes without any difficulty. This path can be taken only by those who have acquired supreme knowledge. These souls are not generally reborn and enjoy the comforts of deva loka. Apasavya is the path taken by those souls whose karmic account is not so good. This path is dark and difficult to cross. They also reach the deva loka to be born again. Trampling this path is difficult and the soul undergoes pain while proceeding in this path. Those who have controlled their senses and mind, devoid of desire, attachments, lust etc continue to stay in the deva loka till pralaya or the annihilation. These Self realised persons transcend even the deva loka and reach the Viṣṇu loka, where all sages and saints inhabit. They always think about Viṣṇu and eternally dwell at his feet. Rig Veda (I.22.20) says, tad viśṇoḥ paramaṃ padaṃ sadā paṣyanti sūrayaḥ meaning ‘they see Him vividly in meditation’. This nāma says that She is in the form of both these paths. To reach the solar disc there are three paths, uttara (north), dakṣiṇa (south) and madhyama (centre). Each of these three paths has three roads (3 x 3 = 9) making a total of nine. Each of these has three stars beginning from Aśvinī and ending with Revatī thereby making a total twenty seven stars of the galaxy. She is said to be in these three major paths and control the universe. {Further reading on sādanā: Sādana is practice. Talking about religion does not give anything spiritually. To progress in spirituality, one must do sādanā (practice). Progression in spirituality is purely based on one’s experience that can be attained only through sādanā. Both Veda-s and Tantra-s prescribe guidelines to attain liberation. It is the question of individual’s degree of quest to understand and follow these guidelines. Faith is the single important aspect of spirituality. In order to develop one’s faith, rituals have been prescribed. But if one continues only with rituals, he does not have time to search for the Brahman. One has to believe in “what is here is there and what is not here is nowhere.” Spirituality says that one must act to know the Brahman. The action begins with rituals and culminates in meditation. Meditation is the most effective sādanā in Self-realisation. Religious ritual is either through karma (action) such as homa etc, or upāsana (engaging mentally). Perfection in these two lead to jñāna or knowledge. Karma, upāsana and jñāna form three fold division of Vedas. Ritual karma is effective only if it is done in total accuracy. The progress in psychological worship (upāsana) depends on the depth of devotion. Again, upāsana is of two types, gross and subtle. When one advances spiritually, his level of sādanā transforms from gross to subtle. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (IX.14 and 15) “Constantly chanting my names and glories and striving for my realisation and bowing again and again to me, those devotees of firm resolve, ever united with me through meditation , worship me with single minded devotion. Others, who follow the path of knowledge betake themselves to me through their offering of knowledge, worshipping me in my Absolute formless aspect as one with themselves. While still others worship me in my universal form in ways taking me as manifested in diverse celestial forms.”}

913. सर्वापद्विनिवारिणी
She is the eliminator of all kinds of misfortunes. Misfortunes arise because of not following either of the two paths (savya and apasavya) discussed in the previous nāma. Irrespective of the path pursued, She is remembered by repeating Her mantra-s (like Pañcadaśī) or names* (like this Sahasranāma) depending upon ones cerebration. This is explained in Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (VI.ii.16), “Those who do not know these two ways become insects and moths, etc.” The same averring is also available in Chāndogya Upaniṣad (V.x.7) “Those who do not follow either of these paths are born as small animals and insects again and again.” The Upaniṣads warn that if one does not follow either of these paths, he has to repeatedly undergo the pains of birth and death as life span of small insects and small animals is very short. Devi Herself says “Those who forsaking attachment take refuge in me, and ever worship me with devotion, by the method of divine yoga, having compassion on all beings, tranquil, self-controlled, free from envy, humble, ascetic, of vows performed with their minds fixed on me, whose lives are in me, delighting in narrating my wisdom……and even those who are devoid of these characteristics, if they repeat my name ever devoted to me, I quickly destroy in the same birth, even mountains of misfortunes by the lamp of wisdom.” Apart from pursuing any one of these paths mentioned in the previous nāma, their mental condition is also equally important. She says that it is not enough to merely pursue the ritualistic path. One has to attain knowledge to connect the individual self with the Supreme Self. Without attaining knowledge this connection is not possible. It is also said that one should always remember Her lotus feet in times of misfortune. The one, who follows the above steps, never gets misfortunes and the one who does not follow these steps has to remember Her lotus feet in times of misfortune. But, liberation is possible only for those who meditate on Her. This nāma says that irrespective of the depth of devotion, one does not face misfortune if she is properly worshipped. {*Someone told Ramana Mahariṣi the she had done pūja with hundred thousand leaves. Mahariṣi retorted by saying “Instead of pinching the plant, could you not pinch your own skin hundred thousand times and perform your pūja?”}

914. स्वस्था
Svasthā means being in one’s natural state and as own natural self with a healthy body and mind without upādhi-s (upādhi means condition. Due to upādhi unlimited thing appears as limited). Sage Nāradā asks Sanatkumāra (one of the four noetic sons of Lord Brahma) in Chāndogya Upaniṣad (VII.24.1) “Where does the Infinite reside?” Sanatkumāra replies “He rests on His own power, or not even on that power.” The pleasure and pain arise only if one thinks of a second object, as the mind now has the chance of choosing. Duality is one of the toughest enemies to tackle with in spiritual pursuit. (There is a story about Lord Gaṇeśa and His mother Pārvatī. Gaṇeśa was playing with a cat and caused injuries in the body of the cat. Then He went to His mother Pārvatī. He saw bruises in Her body asked Her who had hurt Her. Pārvatī replied “You have caused these bruises. You beat the cat, but I am also in the cat. If you hurt the cat, you only hurt me.”) Her independent nature is also described in Kaṭha Upaniṣad (I.iii.11) which says, “There is nothing higher than the Cosmic Self. That marks the end of all growth. This is the highest goal anyone can attain.” Because of being the highest, She is Svasthā.

915. स्वभावमधुरा
She is sweet, pleasant, charming and delightful in nature. Because of these qualities everyone is attracted to Her. This nāma can be split as follows: sva + bha + avama + dhura. Sva means Her, bha means to shine, avama means the best among the wise, and dhura means yoke. In this context this nāma means that She carries the yoke of the wise. She illuminates the path of the wise or by Her presence, the path of the wise is illuminated. They can tread their spiritual path with Her illuminating light. Brahman is Self- illuminating. Svabhā(va) + vama + dhura. Svabhā(va) means the knowledge required for realising the Self, vama means imparting knowledge of the Self and dhura means the Chief. She is the Chief among those who impart knowledge of the Brahman (Śiva). Sva + bhava + madhura. She pleasantly remains in Her devotees. Sva + bhava + madhu + ra. By their own devotion, Her devotees get the best of knowledge. It can be said that one can realise Her within, by knowledge (jñāna) and devotion (bhakthi).

916. धीरा
She is the embodiment of strength. Strength here means the strength of knowledge. The non-duality is the knowledge. The knowledge of non-duality is attained through Her.

917. धीरसमर्चिता
She is adored by scholars. Scholars and poets praise Her. Dhī means the one who is not different from the essence of knowledge, rasa means happiness in plenitude and arcita means worshipped. This nāma means that the one who is in need of supreme knowledge worships Her. The supreme knowledge leads to bliss.

918. चैतन्यार्घ्यसमाराध्या
Caitanya is the foundational consciousness that has absolute freedom of knowing and doing. Śiva Sūtra (I.1) say,s caitanyaṁ ātmā. Caitanya is totally independent. Only Śiva alone possesses this totally independent Supreme Consciousness. All other living beings depend upon this Supreme Consciousness. Arghya means the water offered to respectable guests. Bhavanopaniṣad (10) says, jñānaṁ arghya which means knowledge is the best arghya. When devotion is offered with knowledge, liberation is attained. Bhuvaneśvarī mantra is also known as Caitanya mantra. The repetition of this mantra ten thousand times is said to absolve sins. There are two Bhuvaneśvarī mantra-s. One is single bīja (hrīṁ ह्रीं) and another has three bīja-s (aiṁ-hrīṁ-śrīṁ ऐींह्रींि ीं). {Further reading on Caitanya: Caitanya is the pure consciousness, which is the essence of the Brahman, who manifests in three forms. They are Īśvara, Hiraṇyagarbha, and Virāt. The fourth manifestation of the Brahman is turya. This is the non-dualistic consciousness that appears in different forms due to different preconditioned souls, based on their karmic afflictions. Consciousness limited by ignorance is Īśvara and consciousness conditioned by antaḥkaraṇa (mind, intellect, consciousness and ego) is soul. Both Īśvara and soul (also known as jīvā) act merely as witnesses (sākṣi). Consciousness is generally classified as four types: consciousness related to object, consciousness related to knower, consciousness related to means of knowledge and consciousness related to pure knowledge.} This nāma says that She is worshipped with consciousness as offerings.

919. चैतन्यकुसुमप्रिया
She is very fond of kusum flower. Here consciousness is compared to flower by poets. This is because flower is primarily responsible for the ultimate fruit (liberation). The kusum flower mentioned here represents eight qualities that are the basic requirements for spiritual progress. Each such quality is referred as a flower in the following verse. ahimsā prathamam puṣpam puṣpam indriya-nigraha: sarva-bhūta-dayā puṣpam kṣamā puṣpam viseśata: | jnānam puṣpam tapa: puṣpam dhyānam puṣpam tathaiva ca satyam aśṭavidham puṣpam viṣṇo: prītikaram bhavet || अदहमसा प्रथमम ्पगष्पम ्पगष्पम ्इस्न्द्रय-ननग्रह: सवु-भूत-दया पगष्पम ्क्षमा पगष्पम ्ववसेशत: । ज्नानम ्पगष्पम ्तप: पगष्पम ्ध्यानम ्पगष्पम ्तथैव च सत्यम ्अश्टववधम ्पगष्पम ्ववष्णो: प्र नतकरम ्भवेत ्॥ This verse says non-violence is the first flower, conquering the senses is the second flower, pity on living beings is the third, compassion is the fourth, wisdom is the fifth, penance is the sixth, truth is the seventh and meditation is the eighth flower. There is another version of this version conveying the same meaning. Caitanya is said to be the combination of eight flowers mentioned in the verse and these flowers together is referred as kusuma flower. This nāma means that She does not need flowers picked from plants. Gross flowers are extraneous to one’s consciousness. What She needs is subtle flowers comprising of the above qualities. Kṛṣṇa explicitly explains this in Bhagavad Gīta (IX.26). “Whosoever offers to me with love, a leaf, a flower, a fruit, or even water, I appear in person before him.” Saundarya Laharī (verse 3) says, caitanya stabaka makaranda srutijharī which means ‘the sweetness of knowledge of the Self overflows from the blossomed flowers of caitanya’. The overflowing knowledge manifests as bliss. Sudāma (also known as Kucela- kucela means badly clothed) and Kṛṣṇa studied together during their young age and were very good friends. Sudāma could not make a decent living. His wife compelled him to meet Kṛṣṇa. Sudāma carried with him parched rice in a worn out cloth. When they met, Kṛṣṇa forcibly pulled the pack of worn out cloth and the parched rice grains fell on the floor. Kṛṣṇa addressed Sudāma “Oh! Friend, this loving present brought by you affords me supreme delight. The parched rice will satisfy me and the entire universe.” By saying so, Krishna picked up the grains from the floor and consumed. Sudāma did not ask Kṛṣṇa any favours and returned to his place. On reaching his place he saw his small house had become a huge bungalow. The parched grains that Sudāma offered to Kṛṣṇa was filled with love for Him and Kṛṣṇa reciprocated his deep and true love by offering him material prosperity. This story appears in Srimad Bhāgavata and highlights the value of true devotion.

920. सदोदिता
She is eternally shining (reference can be made to nāma-s 6, 275 and 596 where She is compared to sun). She shines in the mind of virtuous men. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (III.xi.2) says “In Brahma loka, the sun never rose, nor did it ever set.”

921. सदातुष्टा
Sadā means always and tuṣṭā means pleased or satisfied. She always remains satisfied, because of the attributes mentioned in nāma-s 252 and 656. She always remains contended because of true devotion. The quality of the Brahman is eternal contentment, as the Brahman does not partake in any actions and always remain as a witness. Actions alone cause discontentment, a quality of souls. When one realises the ever content Brahman, he also becomes contended.

922. तरुणादित्यपाटला
Pāṭala means pale red, the colour of rising sun. This colour has more of red (Her complexion) and less of white (complexion of Śiva). This means that Her qualities are more predominant than that of Śiva while sustaining the universe. She assumes different complexions depending upon the form in which She is contemplated. Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (II.iii.6) describes the Brahman with limiting adjuncts. It describes the Brahman in various forms, “Like a cloth dyed with turmeric, or like grey sheep’s wool, or like the insect called indigo, or like a white lotus, or like a flash of lightning.” The same Upaniṣad (III.ix.21) again says “Faith rests on the heart, for one knows faith through the heart”. The one who needs salvation meditates Her in white complexion, the one who needs bravery meditates Her in red complexion. Yama, the Lord of death is dark complexioned. Goddess Sarasvatī is visualised sitting on a white lotus. White means knowledge. Every colour has got qualities. Each devotee visualises Her in different complexion based upon his needs. Each cakra shines in different colours in kuṇḍalinī meditation. Such colours have different qualities and when kuṇḍalinī is predominant in a particular cakra, the qualities of that colour become predominant in the practitioner. This nāma does not overrule Her red complexion as discussed in dhyāna verses. This nāma says that Her complexion changes depending upon what is prayed for.

923. दक्षिणादक्षिणाराध्या
She is adored by right hand worshippers known as dakṣinācāra. Left hand worshippers are called vāmācāra. She is adored both by dakṣinācāra and vāmācāra methods as explained in nāma 912. Dakṣiṇa also means knowledgeable men adakṣiṇa means ignorant men. She is worshipped both by wise and ignorant. Anybody who worships Her is a devotee. A devotee could be knowledgeable or ignorant. Knowledgeable means the one who pursues the Brahman mentally, expecting nothing in return from Her, except salvation. Ignorant means the one who continues to be associated with rituals expecting something in return from Her. Dakṣiṇa also means offerings made to one’s Guru. It can also be interpreted that She is pleased when offerings are made to a Guru who initiates disciples into Śrī vidyā cult. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (VII.15, 16 and 17) “foolish and vile men of evil deeds do not adore me. Four types of devotees of noble deeds worship me: the seeker after worldly possessions, the afflicted, the seeker for knowledge and man of wisdom. Of these best is the man of wisdom, ever established in me and possessed of exclusive devotion. I am extremely dear to that man and he is extremely dear to me.”

924. दरस्मेरमुखाम्बुजा
Her face is adorned with smile, comparable to fully blossomed lotus flower. Her entire form is described as a lotus flower in nāma 460 Nalinī. Even Śiva was attracted by Her smile as said in nāma 28 ‘mandasmita-prabhāpūra-majjatkāmeśa-mānasā’. Nāma 602 also describes Her smile. The cause of the smile is described in nāma 878 svātmārāmā meaning ‘She rejoices in Her own Self’. Rejoicing in one’s own self gives eternal happiness that gets beamed as smile. Darasmera also means a shining conch shell. Here, Her teeth are compared to shining white conch shell. It also refers to Her neck where there are three lines. These three lines are said to be the three alphabets of OM (a, u, m). Triśatī nāma 157 compares Her neck to a conch shell. Saundarya Laharī (verse 69) refers to three lines in Her neck. The verse says te gale tisraḥ rekhāḥ meaning ‘three lines on Your neck’. Even during the times of fear (the great deluge also known as annihilation) Her face remains shining. When Śiva performs the cosmic dance causing annihilation, She remains as a witness without showing any signs of fear. Even during the terrible annihilation, She continues to smile. This means that She is not afraid of anything. One does not fear for anything as long as he is svātmārāmā (nāma 878). {Further reading on the cosmic dance of Śiva: At the time of annihilation, signalling the end of a cosmic cycle Kālāgni Rudra embraces the universe in dance of death and destruction. This is called tāṇḍava (refer nāma 232). Śiva dances to the drum beats causing every single object in all the universes merge into a divine unity. The fire that burns the universes dissolves into water, water into wind, wind into akash, akash into multitude of deva-s and devas into the Brahman. At this stage puruṣa and prakṛti are separated and merge into Śiva. Śiva alone exists witnessed by Śaktī. This dance of Śiva is called pulsating process of creation and annihilation.}

925. कौलिनी केवला
Kaulinī has already been discussed in nāma 94 and kevalā has been discussed in nāma 623. The knowledge of Śiva is known as kevalā or pure. Śiva Sūtra (III.34) says, tadvimumtastu kevalī which means “established in his real self, freed from pleasure and pain” (refer nāma 878 svātmārāmā). Kevala and svātmārāma are the terms that are used to refer a person whose consciousness is always established in the Brahman. In this stage, dualities do not exist. When the mind becomes devoid of dualities, it has the inherent capacity to stay connected with the Brahman perpetually. Opposites are the perceptions of the mind, when it gets associated with senses. Therefore Kevala means the doctrine of the unity of the Spirit. Kaulinī is the one who follows kaula mārga (nāma 441). Kaula is the doctrine and practices of the left-hand Śākta-s. This nāma can be explained on the basis of Spanda-kārikā (I.8) which says “The empirical individual (here referring to Kaulinī) cannot derive the urge of desire. But by coming into contact with the power of the Self (kevalā – meaning Śaktī here), he becomes equal to that principle.” In śāktā worship, Śaktī is called kevalā. This nāma means that Kaulinī-s transform into kevalā because of worshipping Her. She helps this transformation.

926. अनर्घ्यकैवल्यपददायिनी
Anarghya means invaluable, kaivalya means the stage of beatitude leading to emancipation and dāyinī means giver. Nāma 625 is kaivalya-pada-dāyinī. This nāma is the reconfirmation of nāma 625. The only difference between these two nāma-s is the prefix anarghya in this nāma. This prefix stresses the importance of kaivalya or ceasation of the process of transmigration. In addition to what has been explained in nāma 625, kaivalya also means the existence of soul in essence. The knowledge of understanding that soul and prakṛti are different from each other, leads to kaivalya or emancipation. Kaivalya is also known as mokṣa or mukti. Kaivalya, a term used in sāṃkhya philosophy, is the perfect isolation not only in human existence but also in angelic existence. It is an unfettered, omniscient and perfect state of existence of soul or jīva. The isolated and pure spirit does not succumb to bondages of saṁsāra and hence released from transmigration. The final stage of discriminative knowledge is called Kaivalya jñāna and this is achieved in nirvikalpa samādi (nirvikalpa means devoid of changes), the highest state of consciousness. Kaivalya jñāna is also known as illumination, Self-realisation, enlightenment, emancipations, liberation, etc. Sage Patañjali in his yoga sūtra (IV.36) says, kaivalyam dharma dharmiṇaḥ puruṣasya. The interpretation of this sūtra is ‘The freedom of liberation is the very state of this substance or the being. It is not to be attained, not that you experience something new, that liberation is the very nature of the being.” Kaivalya stage is already embedded in the soul, but efforts are not initiated to realise it. Yoga teaches the path of realising it. This nāma says that without Her help kaivalya stage cannot be attained.

927. स्तोत्रप्रिया
Stotra means praise, eulogium, a hymn of praise. Texts or verses, which are sung is stotra as opposed to the śāstra-s, which are recited. Stotra is classified into six types – salutation, benedictions, extolling the accomplishments, praising feats, rehearsing glory and prayer for prosperity. The entire one thousand nāma-s of this Sahasranāma are based on these six types. Nāma-s 627, 928, 735, 79, 658 and 692 are quoted as examples. This nāma says that She is fond of praise by verses like Śrī Devi Māhātmyam, or Vedic verses like Śrī sūkta, Durgā sūkta, etc. {There is a treatise called Vanadurgā Vidhānā also known as Vanadurgā saptasatī consisting of seven hundred verses. The recitation of this treatise is said to eliminate all misfortunes and miseries. Unfortunately, this is not widely prevalent now, though a few printed editions are available. The recitation will be difficult as it contains more bīja-s and mūla mantra-s than verses.}

928. स्तुतिमती
Stuti means praise, mati means knowledge. If She is praised through stotra-s as mentioned in the previous nāma, he gets knowledge that is required to realise the Brahman. Matī can be split into mati + i. Mati means knowledge and i refers to wealth. If She is praised, one gets both knowledge and wealth.

929. श्रुतिसंस्तुतवैभवा
Śruti means Veda-s and saṃstuta means experience. This nāma says that She is celebrated through Veda-s. The source of this nāma is Bahvṛcā Upaniṣad (107th of 108 commonly known Upaniṣads) which says that Devi (She is referred as Mahā Tripurasundari and Lalitāmbikā) is the Creator and from Her alone everything was created. The Upaniṣad reaffirms Her Brahmanic status. Brahman is praised in all the Veda-s and Upaniṣads. It is also said that Devi has four types of powers, peace, knowledge, immutableness and restraint that are Her own. It is also said that Śiva enjoys His bliss through Her four independent powers. All other powers of Devi are given by Śiva. Kena Upaniṣad (IV.8) says “Austerity, self-restraint and spiritual practice form the foundation of Self-knowledge. The Veda-s are its limbs and truth is its abode.” {Further reading: The following well known verse says that Śiva is the source of knowledge of Veda-s, Upaniṣads and epics. śruti smriti purāṇām ālayam karunālayam namāmi bhagavadpādam śaṅkaraṁ lokaśankaraṃ िगनत स्स्म्रनत पगराणाम ्आलयम ्करुनालयम ् नमालम भगवद्पादम ्शङ्करींलोकशन्द्करीं Meaning of the above verse: I prostrate to Lord Śiva, who causes welfare to the universe, who is the repository of the divine Knowledge of Veda-s, Upaniṣads and texts of mythology and who is the embodiment of mercy. Difference between śruti and smṛti: Śruti is sacred eternal sounds or words as eternally heard by certain holy sages called Ṛṣi-s, and so differing from smṛti or what is only remembered and handed down in writing by human authors.}

930. मनस्विनी
Her mind is svatantra or self-dependence, self-will or freedom. This is also known as the doctrine of free will. This is the stage where the manifestation of existence has not yet started. It abides in transcendence, as designated will, in which that which is to be willed, has not yet become prominent. This will is only a state of consciousness of the transcendental being. The Brahman is always conscious of His own nature. This nāma says that She has equanimous mind. She has svatantra svabhāva which means independence is Her essential nature. Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (IV.iv.20) says, “Through the mind alone the Brahman is to be realised.”

931. मानवती
She has a mind of high moral or intellectual value, elevated in nature and style. Because of this quality of the mind, She is adored as Śrī Mātā or the Divine Mother. This nāma says that She has high-mind that comprises of forgiveness and compassion.

932. महेशी
Wife of Maheśvarā (Śiva). She is also addressed as Māheśvarī in nāma 208 and Maheśvarī in nāma 750. This nāma also says that She originated from Maheśvara.

933. मङ्गलाकृतिः
Mangal (मङ्गल) means auspiciousness, happiness, felicity, welfare, bliss, etc. This nāma says that She is the embodiment of these qualities. This nāma reaffirms the qualities discussed in nāmas 116 and 200.

934. विश्वमाता
She has all forms or one whose body is the universe and applied only to the Supreme Spirit. These are the qualities of Viśvamūrti. Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (XIII.13) “Brahman stands pervading in the universe.” This nāma confirms Her omnipresent nature, the exclusive quality of the Brahman. Because of being Viśvamātā, She is Śrī Mātā (nāma 1). The first nāma of Viṣṇu Sahasranāma is Viśvā as He is Viśvamūrti. It is also said that She is the mother of Viṣṇu. Viśva means Viṣṇu and mātā means mother. Though viśva in general means allpervading or all-containing, omnipresent, in particular it means Lord Viṣṇu. Based upon this explanation, it is said that She is the mother of Viṣṇu.

935. जगद्धात्री
She is the supporter of the universe as discussed in nāma 337 Vidhātri. Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (IV.iv.22) says “It is the lord of all, It is the ruler of all beings, It is the protector of all beings” (It means the Brahman). She supports and sustains the universe.

936. विशालाक्षी
She has large eyes. Saundarya Laharī (verse 49) describes Her eyes. “Your eyes are expansive, auspicious, glittering with brilliance, full of compassion, etc”. The form of Lalitāmbikā does not have abhaya (a is used here to negate bhaya, which means fear) and varada (granting wishes, conferring a boon, ready to fulfil requests or answer prayers) hands. Generally, forms of gods and goddesses are described with more than two hands. One hand which is known as varada hasta (hasta means hand) is said to confer boons and another hand known as abhaya hasta removes fear, and offers peace, safety and security. But Lalitāmbikā offers these through Her eyes. Hence Her eyes are praised in many scriptures. Saundarya Laharī (verses 52 to 57) extol Her eyes. In this Sahasranāma nāma-s 18, 362, 561 and 601 praise Her eyes. Her eyes are large because She offers Her grace to the entire universe. Her eyes embellish Her whole form.

937. विरागिणी
She is devoid of passion. Virāgya means freedom from all worldly desires. This quality has already been discussed in nāma 156 nīrāgā. In this Sahasranāma there are certain nāma-s that convey the same meaning already described in some other nāma. Such usages are mainly to reaffirm certain qualities. For example, there are several nāma-s that affirm Her status as the Brahman.

938. प्रगल्भा
She is bold and confident and behaves resolutely. She is resolute because She governs the universe with the Law of Karma known as the law of the Lord. She does not transgress Her own laws.

939. परमोदारा
She is extremely generous. She gives without asking or She gives more than what is asked for. Udāra means great and parā means Supreme. She is addressed as the Supreme greatness as She is beyond time and space. This nāma can be split into parā (Supreme) + moda (bliss) + ā (allround) + ra means gives. Then it means that She gives perpetual eternal happiness known as bliss. Bliss is the penultimate stage to final liberation. {Interesting reading: Astrologically it is said that liberation is possible only if planet Ketu or planet Jupiter is associated with ninth house in the natal chart. Twelfth house is mokṣa giving house. Placement of Ketu in the twelfth house is said to give liberation. Ketu in twelfth house from ātma kāraka planet in navāṃśa is said to give liberation.)

940. परामोदा
Parā means supreme and modā means joy, delight, gladness, pleasure. This nāma says that She is the embodiment of supreme joy (bliss). The previous nāma said that She gives Supreme happiness (bliss) and this nāma says She is the embodiment of bliss. Her gross form is described so beautifully in this Sahasranāmam that enables one to visualise Her, that leads to bliss. Therefore, it becomes important that one should understand the meaning of each nāma. Since She is the embodiment auspiciousness, grace and compassion, She is said to be the embodiment of bliss.

941. मनोमयी
She is the embodiment of mind. Patañjali yoga sūtra (IV.24) says “The mind, though variegated by innumerable desires, acts for another, because it acts in combination.” In his next aphorism he says “For the discriminating, the perceptions of the mind as Ātman ceases.” That is why Kṛṣṇa said in Bhagavad Gīta (VI.35) “The mind is restless no doubt and difficult to curb. But it can be brought under control by repeated practice (meditation) and by the exercise of dispassion.” Kṛṣṇa further says (Bhagavad Gīta VI.26) “Drawing back the restless and fidgety mind from all those objects after which it runs, he should repeatedly fix it on God.” The unobstructed consciousness (khecari śakti*) is liberation. The unobstructed consciousness is due to the awareness of the essential nature of Reality (anuttara) that is constantly present and which arises from the bliss of recognition of the completion of the union of Śaktī with Śiva. It is not simply the knowledge of Śaktī or Śiva that brings about liberation. But the constant awareness in close embrace with them that brings in the real transformation. Liberation happens only if the mind is transformed. Liberation is not attained through meditation alone. The presence of the Brahman should be felt in all the actions that one does. This is known as perpetual meditation or khecari samyā and is responsible for transmuting the mundane mind into Divine Consciousness, where Śiva is revealed. Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (IV.iv.20) says that Brahman can be realised only through the mind. This nāma says that She is the One who is capable of causing the transmutation discussed above. * khecari śakti is said to be a part of Vāmeśvarī śaktī connected with the empirical self. Khecari is one that moves in Kha or the vast expanse of consciousness. Please refer nāma 945.

942. व्योमकेशी
Vyoman means heaven, sky, atmosphere, air, ether, wind, etc and keśā means hair. Her hair is said to be ākāś element. This is said to be Her virāt form. Virāt refers to the first state of the Brahman in the form of the empirical universe. There are four states, waking, dream, deep sleep and turya. The first stage is the waking stage also known as virāt (nāma 778). Virāt is also known as viśvā (nāma 934). The nāma says that Her hair represents ether or atmosphere. Śiva is known as Vyomakeśā (sky-haired) and His consort is Vyomakeśi.

943. विमानस्था
She is not different from other gods and goddesses who fly in the sky through celestial chariots. All the gods and goddesses have their own celestial vehicles known as vāhanā. Vi (accord) + māna (protect) + sthā (occupied with). This way, the nāma means that She is occupied with protecting Her devotees. Devotees mean the entire creation. For Her all beings are devotees. But a devotee is the one who always think about Her with the sole purpose of attaining liberation. If Vimān is taken in literal sense, it could mean that She resides in Cakra-rājam chariot (nāma 68) and Geya cakrā chariot (nāma 69). Vimā means the unconditioned Brahman and sthā means reside. She limits the Brahman into different manifestations. (The nirguṇa Brahman is beyond manifestation). This nāma also means That She is immeasurable (Brahman is immeasurable). She is adored by Veda-s and scriptures originated from Veda-s such as Upaniṣads..

944. वज्रिणी
Śiva is known as Vajrā and his consort is Vajriṇī. There is another interpretation to this nāma which says that She is in the form of Indrāṇī, wife of Lord Indra. Indra is the chief of gods and goddesses. God is different from Brahman. Brahman is the ultimate. Gods and goddesses are the functional heads. For example Agni is the Lord of fire; Varuṇa is the lord of water, etc. Indra is the chief of such gods and goddesses. Indra has a powerful weapon called vajrāyudha (said to have been formed out of the bones of the Ṛṣi Dadhīca or Dadhīci), the thunder bolt. This nāma says that Lalitāmbikā holds vajrāyudha in Her hand to destroy the sinners. The nāma could also mean that She is bedecked with diamonds and gems. Kaṭha Upaniṣad (II.iii.2) says “The Brahman is like a thunderbolt (vajra) about to strike.” Brahman strikes those who are delinquent in performing the prescribed duties. The sun shines fearing the Brahman, the air blows fearing Brahman. Kaṭha Upaniṣad (II.iii.3) explains this; “From fear of Brahman, fire gives heat. Out of terror, the sun shines. Afraid of it, Indra, vāyu and Yama rush to perform their respective duties.” Every action that happens in this universe is headed by a god or goddesses and when they do not perform their duties, as prescribed, She wields Her thunderbolt. This nāma also means that She ensures discipline in the universe for its sustenance. Vajrayoginī and Vajreśvarī are the two Buddhist goddesses.

945. वामकेश्वरी
There are two nāma-s in Lalitā Sahasranāma beginning with vāmakeśā. The other one is 351. Vāmakeśi Apart from what was discussed in nāma 351, following is the additional information. Vāma has innumerable meanings such as beautiful, splendid, Śiva, Durgā, Lakṣmī, Sarasvatī, a beautiful woman, wife, left side, etc. Keśi means hair. Then nāma 351 said that She is the wife of Vāmakeśvara. But this interpretation did not go with the preceding and succeeding nāma-s there. Nāma 350 refers to Goddess Sarasvatī and nāma 352 could mean Durgā. If these interpretations are correct, nāma 351 should refer to Goddess Lakṣmī, which seems to be appropriate. Vāmakeśvari here refers to Vāmakeśvara tantra. This tantra is said to be the sixty fifth tantra apart from the sixty four discussed in Saundarya Laharī verse 31 and nāma 236 of this Sahasranāma. Vāmakeśvara tantra is said to be the most important tantra for Śrī vidyā worship. This tantra discusses on internal worship of Śaktī. Vāmakeśvari is said to be the source of this Universe. Śaktī asks Śiva in Vāmakeśvara tantra “Lord, you had revealed to me all the sixty four tantra-s. But you have not told me about sixteen vidyā-s.” Śiva answers by saying that this has not yet been declared and begins declaring this tantra to Devi. Everything in this tantra has been revealed in a very subtle manner. For example the bīja hrīṁ is declared as ‘the form of vidyā protecting the self is Śiva, agni, māyā and bindu.’ Unless one knows the bīja-s of these gods/goddesses, it is difficult to make out the hidden bīja-s. Śiva bīja is ha (ह), agni bīja is ra (र) and kāmakalā (ईं) joined together give rise to māyā bīja hrīṁ (ह्रीं) is arrived. Śiva declares a number of uncommon yet powerful bīja-s in this tantra. Vāmā-s mean those who worship Her through left hands. They do not follow the five principle yajñā-s discussed the next nāma. She is the Goddess for these left hand worshippers. She is also known as Vāmeśvarī, which refers to Her divine power which projects the universe out of Śiva (the Brahman without attributes) and produces the reverse (vāma) consciousness of difference. Vāmadevā is the back face of Śiva.

946. पञ्चयज्ञप्रिया
Pañca means five and yajña means act of worship and devotion that prevailed during Vedic period and offerings, oblations and sacrifice prevailing in post-Vedic literature. Yajña actually means sacrifice personified. There are two types of yajna-s, the one referred in Veda-s that has been heard or communicated from the beginning. It is the sacred knowledge orally transmitted from generation to generation. Rig Veda contains numerous references to rituals. Yajur Veda samhita on the other hand contains mantra-s that are to be recited at the rituals and prose passages explaining them, known as brāhmaṇā-s. Brāhmaṇā passages guide to execute and preserve the intricacies of Vedic rituals. The other type of yajña is referred in smṛti, the whole body of sacred tradition or what is remembered by human teachers in contradistinction to śruti. Smṛti includes the six Vedāṅga-s, the sūtra-s (both śrauta and gṛhya), the law-books of Manu, etc. The five yajña-s referred in Veda-s are agntihotra, darśapūrṇamāsa, cāturmāsya, paśubandha and soma. Soma ritual includes all the other four rituals and considered as the supreme among the five. The five yajña-s referred in smṛti-s are known as pañca mahā yajña-s. They are Deva yajña (appeasing gods and goddesses), brahma yajña (the knower of Vedas), pitṛ yajña (for ancestors), bhūta yajna (animals, etc) and nara or atithi yajña (nara means man and atithi means guest). Atithi is explained as a person who is entitled for hospitality). Deva yajña is the worship to one’s kula devatā (the deity worshipped through lineage). The study of Veda-s is the next. Remembering our ancestors is the third. This is performed on the anuual death days of ancestors. The idea behind this yajña is not only to remember them, but also to remember and follow the family’s culture and values. Bhūta yajña means sharing with other living beings. Feeding the hungry animals develops universal love. The last one also known as manuṣya yajña (manuṣya means friendly to man), traditional hospitality extended to fellow beings. Pāñcarātra āgama-s prescribe five rituals for worshipping Viṣṇu. Abhigamana (approaching Viṣṇu), upādāna (collecting pūja materials), ijya (the pūja worship), and svadhaya (repetition of Veda-s, verses-s, etc). Viṣṇu is often praised with gadya (prose, composition not metrical yet framed in accordance with harmony, elaborate prose composition). Chāndogya Upaniṣad (V.4 to 9) talks about five types of oblations that cause the birth of man. They are offered by gods as oblations. First gods offered water as oblation from which appeared Soma (moon). They offered Soma as the second oblation from which appeared rain. They offered water as third oblation and there appeared food. They offered food as the fourth oblation and there appeared fluids of procreation. They offered fluids of procreation as the fifth oblation and there appeared foetus. This nāma says that She is fond of above yajña-s.

947. पञ्चप्रेतमञ्चाधिशायिनी
Preta means cadaver. When prāṇa leaves the body, the once existed physical body becomes preta or corpse and the soul immediately comes under the control of Pretādhipati, Lord Yama. The intricacies of this nāma are discussed in Saundarya Laharī (verse 92). Pañca-preta means Brahma, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Mahādeva and Sadāśiva. This is a correlation between the conception, where mind is involved and the perception where senses are involved. She is seated on a throne whose legs are Brahma, Viṣṇu, Rudra and Mahādeva and whose seat is Sadāśiva. There are two ways of looking at this nāma. The first way is look at the scene from philosophical doctrine. The omnipresence nature of the Brahman is the focal point of this nāma. Macrocosmic existence of the Brahman has been repeatedly stressed in all the Upaniṣad-s. Brahma, Viṣṇu and other gods mentioned in this nāma are only the manifestation of the Brahman. To enable us to understand the philosophy of creation, Veda-s have created distinct gods and goddesses to take care of each of the phenomenon in the process of creation. Considering Lalitāmbikā as the kinetic force in the process of creation, sustenance, dissolution, annihilation and recreation, the nāma aptly refers Brahma, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Mahādeva and Sadāśiva as parts of the throne where She is seated. It is not the name that matters, but the assignment given to them by the Brahman for effective equilibration of this universe is important. The other way of looking at this nāma is to resolve on the basis that without kinetic energy, the predominant static energy does not become functional. In other words, Śiva cannot be said to be the functional head of the universe, unless ably aided by His consort Lalitāmbikā, the able dynamic energy, the energy created by Śiva Himself. Tantra loka (IV.6) says, “only by the union with Śaktī, subtle Śiva is known. She is the ultimate unified Śaktī, the Parameśvarī, the very Self of Brahma, Viṣṇu, and Īśā.” This nāma says that the functional heads become ineffective (dead) without the presence of divine energy infused into them by Her. The five cadavers refer to a stage where the superior functional heads turn into corpses in the absence of energy infused by Her. This nāma decisively and authoritatively confirms Her Bramanic status. Please refer nāma 249 and 250 for further details.

948. पञ्चमी
Pañcamī means the fifth. Out of five gods discussed in the above nāma, Sadāśiva is considered as the Supreme, as He recreates the universe after great dissolutions (pralaya). He is also known as Pañcama and His wife is Pañcamī. In Sadāśiva tattva, the experience of ‘I’ is more predominant than the experience of ‘this’. Vārāhi Devi is also known as Pañcamī. Pañcamī forms a part of one of Vārāhi mantra-s. Vārāhi has already been discussed in nāma 67. She is one among the seven mātā-s known as sapta (seven) mātā-s and fifth in that order. Hence Pañcamī. The fifth oblation discussed in nāma 946 is also known as Pañcamī. Kaivalya is the fifth and the last stage in liberation. The other four are sālokya (being in the same sphere of deity), sarūpa (assimilation to the deity), samībhya (very very close to the deity, but as a different entity) and sayujya (intimately united with the deity). Kaivalya, the fifth stage is where the soul is completely disconnected from the mind-stuff and the liberation is attained without further transmigrations. Kaivalya means the complete isolation of the self. Please also refer nāma-s 625 and 926. This nāma could mean all these interpretations.

949. पञ्चभूतेशी
She is the ruler of five elements. Taittirīya Upaniṣad (II.i.1) says, satyaṁ jñānam anantaṁ brahma which means truth, knowledge and infinite is the Brahman. After having declared the Brahman thus, the Upaniṣad proceeds to say “From the Brahman comes space, from space air, from air fire, from fire water, from water earth...” The Upaniṣad says that the five elements originated from the Brahman. Based on the fact that She is the Brahman, this nāma says that She is the embodiment of the five elements. There is an ancient treatise known as Pañcadaśī by Śrī Vidyānārāyaṇa Svāmī (the Head of Śrī Sringeri Math from 1377 – 1386). This treatise says, (II.1) “Brahman according to śruti, the non-dual reality, can be known by the process of differentiation from the five elements.” Viṣṇu wears a garland known as Vaijayanta, made of five gems pearl, ruby, yellow sapphire, emerald and diamond. This is a kind of garland prognosticating victory. These gems said to represent the five elements. Vaijayanta is the garland prognosticating victory. Since She is not different from Vishnu, She is called Vaijayanti.

950. पञ्चसङ्ख्योपचारिणी
She is worshipped by five types of reverent offerings. Saṃkhy means to appear along with or connected with and upacāra means reverence. She is worshipped through five types of offerings such as gandha (sandal paste), puṣpa (flowers), dhūpa (incense), dīpa (light) and nivedya (food). Each of them represents one element. They are earth, ākāś, air, fire and water. Through these five offerings, communication is established between the worshipper and the worshipped. Chāndogya Upaniṣad (VI.ii.1) says “Out of that non-existence (Brahman), existence emerged (through the five elements).” Hence, the Brahman is worshipped through these five upacāra-s, the reverence paid to the Brahman for His act of Creation (through five elements). It is an act of thanks giving to the Brahman for having created the universe of which the individual soul of the worshipper forms a miniscule part of creation.

951. शाश्वती
She is incessantly eternal (śāśvatībhyaḥ samābhyaḥ, śāśvatīḥ samāḥ). It also means frequently. In this context this nāma means She is worshipped again and again. Kaṭha Upaniṣad (II.ii.12) says, “The cosmic Self (the Brahman) is one, yet It controls all. It is the inmost Self of all beings, and it manifests itself as many. Those wise people who see that Self within themselves are eternally happy and not others.”

952. शाश्वतैश्वर्या
Śāśvatīḥa (permanent) + iśvarya (wealth) is śāśvataiśvarya (permanent wealth). She is the embodiment of eternal wealth, the wealth of knowledge and prosperity.

953. शर्मदा
Śarman means Joy, bliss, comfort, delight, happiness, etc. Nāma 125 is śarmadāyinī which means giver of comforts. . The joy or comfort that She gives is different from what is attained by the self. The happines gained by the self from material comforts is impermanent. The bliss that She gives is eternal. The same meaning is conveyed through these two nāma-s. It can also be said that one nāma refers to physical comforts and another refers to mental faculty (bliss). The true joy is attaining liberation.

954. शम्भुमोहिनी
She entices Lord Śambhu. (Lord Śiva, Her consort). Śiva is the One who has controlled His senses. But, in terms of nāma 863 Kāmakeli-tarangitā, She infatuates Śiva.

955. धरा
She is in the form earth. She is the Goddess Earth, Prakṛti. Dhara means bearing, supporting, holding, carrying, wearing, possessing, having, keeping, sustaining, preserving, observing, etc. All these attributes pertain to Her act of sustenance. (The bīja akśara of earth is la ल and usage of la refers to prakṛti.)

956. धरसुता
Sutā means daughter. She is the daughter of Himavān (the king of mountains). This has been already discussed in nāma 246 Pārvatī. Dhara also includes mountains, forests, etc.

957. धन्या
Dhanya means bringing or bestowing wealth, opulent, riches, or fortunate, happy, auspicious etc. In this context this nāma means that She is the possessor of wealth and auspiciousness. Dhanya also means an expression of thanks. The last moments of human life, the hour of death is known as caramakāla. It is said that one will have four kinds of thoughts during this period. They are 1. Ārta, where one will have concupiscent thoughts as a result of which he is born as plants, animals or birds in the next birth. 2. Raudra, where even when he is seriously hurt and undergoing painful moments, he will not disassociate himself from the above thoughts and as a result of which he is born as smallest insects. (The process of birth and death is highly painful.) His soul will never have liberation. 3. Dhanya (the present nāma), where one fixes his consciousness on the teachings of Veda-s, Upaniṣad-s and compassionate thoughts. 4. Śukla, where he fixes his consciousness in mahā vākya-s such as “I am That” or aham Brahmāsmi. He enters the death hour with his consciousness fixed on the Brahman. He continues his perpetual meditative stage even at caramakāla. He is never born again and his soul attains liberation. In this context, this nāma means that She is in the form of dhanya stage. This is best explained by Kṛṣṇa in Bhagavad Gīta (VIII.5 and 6). “He, who departs from the body, thinking of me alone even at the time of death, attains my state; there is no doubt about it. Thinking of whatever entity one leaves the body at the time death, that and that alone one attains, being ever absorbed in its thoughts.”

958. धर्मिणी
Dharma means that which is established, steadfast decree, statute, ordinance, law and usage and its customary observance. She is said to be in the form of dharma described here.

959. धर्मवर्धिनी
She causes increase of righteousness in the minds of Her devotees. Śiva is known for control of senses, Sun is known for its purity and She is known for Her devotion to Her spouse, Śiva. The one who meditates on them is said to gain those qualities. Vardha means cutting or dividing and in this sense She cuts (removes) the deceptive nature of materialistic world for Her devotees. Only through Her, Śiva can be attained.

960. लोकातीता
She transcends all the worlds. Loka-s mean Indra loka, Brahma loka, Viṣṇu loka, etc. The Loka-s are different level of one’s consciousness. She lives along with Śiva in Mahā Kailāśa also known as Parā Kailāśa. She transcends all the other worlds (lower level of consciousness) and dwells at Mahā Kailāśa (the highest level of pure consciousness where Self-realisation takes place). It is also said that the place of Śiva is known as Apada which means no abode, meaning void. In the various techniques discussed in Vijñāna Bhairava, there are many techniques that discuss about meditation on the void. Apada also means fivefold state, an aggregate of five elements, viz. earth, air, fire, water and ākāś, and dissolution into them i.e. death. This place is filled with souls that were associated with rituals. Souls reaching this place return back to earth. Above Apada, there are three sovereign eternal pure seats resorted by Skanda, Umā and Śiva. These seats are maintained by those who are devoted to the Brahman through meditation. They do not return to earth. They ultimately merge into Śiva not to be born again.

961. गुणातीता
She transcends attributes or guṇa-s. She is the Brahman without attributes also known as nirguṇa Brahman. Guṇa s are three, sattva, rajas and tamas. The whole universe remains in a potential state within prakṛti so long as the three guṇa-s (attributes) remain motionless and undisturbed as discussed in nāmā 397 mūlapṛakrti. This nāma says that She is beyond mūlapṛakrti.

962. सर्वातीता
She transcends all. Nāma 960 said that She transcends all the worlds and nāma 961 said that She transcends attributes. This nāma says that She transcends entirety which means that She is the Supreme. She knows the universe and the universe knows Her. Śiva does not interfere in the affairs of the universe. Śiva is the ultimate and beyond human comprehension. It is only through Her, Śiva can be attained. The specific reference to worlds and attributes is based on the fact that realisation can be attained in the midst of pure consciousness (referred as worlds in nāma 960) and beyond the progression of guṇa-s from tamas to sattvic, and beyond. Consciousness and attributes are the most important tools in Self-realisation.

963. शमात्मिका
Śama means tranquillity that is attained through intense meditation or emancipation from all the illusions of existence. Tranquillity is Her nature. This is best explained in Māṇḍūkya Upaniṣad (7). “It is not conscious of all objects simultaneously. It is not unconscious either. It is invisible, not susceptible to any kind of usage, not within the reach of any organ of action. It is beyond perception by any organ, beyond thought, and not to be indicated by any sound. In it there is only consciousness of the Self and there is a cessation of the world as such. It is the embodiment of peace and of all that is good. It is one without a second.” The word Śam was frequently used in Vedic period to mean auspiciousness, happiness and fortunateness. But in post Vedic period its usage to mean the above qualities is almost negligible. This nāma says that She is the incarnation of all these qualities.

964. बन्धूककुसुमप्रख्या
Bandhūka is a tree (Pentapetes Phoenicea) whose flower is yellowish red in colour. This flower is said to be very bright and tender. She is compared to this flower.

965. बाला
She is known as Bālā in Her manifestation as a young girl of nine years. In nāma 74 Bālā is referred as the child of Lalitāmbikā. Generally. Bālā mantra is the first mantra that is initiated in Śrī vidyā worship. Bālā mantra is aiṃ-klīṃ-sauḥ (ऐीं-कलरीं-सौः). Bālā is described as the one clad in red garments, whose forehead is decorated with a crescent moon, who has three eyes, whose brilliance is like that of the rising sun, who is seated on a red lotus and who holds in Her four hands a book, a rosary, abhaya and varada mudra-s. Bālā mantra will not fructify unless the curse on the mantra is removed by reciting Tripura Bhairavi mantra one hundred times. (Generally mantra-s have curses from riṣi-s and gods. One has to remove the curses by reciting the appropriate curse removing mantra-s to attain fructification.) Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (IV.3) describes the Brahman, “You are a woman, you are a man, you are a boy and you are also a girl (Bālā).”

966. लीलाविनोदिनी
Līlā means facility in doing anything. In the present context, Līlā means Her three primary actions of creation, sustenance and dissolution. Manu smṛti (I.80) says “Brahman creates and dissolves the different periods of Manu-s playfully.” Brahma Sūtra (II.i.33) says, “Creation is a mere pastime for the Brahman.” The act of Creation, as if it is a play for the Brahman is based on logical reasoning. The Brahman acts in spontaneity without extraneous influence or motive. Activities concerned with names and forms arise out of ignorance and meant to propound the fact that everything is Brahman. Brahman plays hide and seek game with humans, using His potent tool known as māyā or illusion. Līlā also refers to Goddess Lakṣmī.

967. सुमङ्गली
Maṅgala means anything auspicious. A faithful wife is also known as maṅgala. Umā, the consort of Śiva is also known as Maṅgala. Su means possession of supremacy. It also means good, excellent, right, virtuous, beautiful, etc. Therefore, this nāma says that She is the embodiment of supreme auspiciousness. The one that drives away evilness is also known as maṅgala. Brahman is the everlasting auspiciousness. Viṣṇu Sahasranāma verse 15 ends with maṅgalānām ca maṅgalam. It is said that maṅgala not only means auspiciousness, but also causes auspiciousness. {Further reading: Tuesday is called maṅgala vāra. It is widely believed that Tuesday is an inauspicious day. This is based on the principle that Mars, the ruling planet of Tuesday is considered as one of the evil planets. There appears to be no strong reasoning for declaring Tuesday as inauspicious. Sanskrit texts call planet Mars as Maṅgala and Kuja. Yet another intriguing factor is kuja doṣa, analysed for marriage compatibility. There are a number of exceptions to kuja doṣa that are to be thoroughly understood. The one who truly believes Her, never looks into the planets which are under Lalitāmbikā’s control. There is an ancient Tamil saying that day and planets will never cause harm to someone who reposes total faith in Śiva} Following verse is from Mūkapañcaśatī - Pādāravindaśatakam verse 59. The verse says that all the nine planets are at Her lotus feet. The recital of this verse by simultaneously meditating on Her lotus feet will eradicate evil effects of all the planets. दधानो भास्वत्ताममतृ ननलयो लोदहतवपगः ववन्द्म्राणाीं सौमयो गगरुरवप कववत्वीं च कलयन्। गतौ मन्द्दो गङ्गाधरमदहवष कामाक्षक्ष भजताीं तमः केतमग ातस्ु तव चरण्पद्मो ववज्यते ॥ dadhāno bhāsvattāmamṛtanilayo lohitavapuḥ vinmrāṇāṁ saumyo gururapi kavitvaṁ ca kalayan । gatau mando gaṅgādharamahiṣi kāmākṣi bhjatāṁ tamaḥ ketumārtastava caraṇpadmou vijyate ॥

968. सुखकरी
She gives happiness. Her lineament of giving happiness to Her devotees is discussed in nāma 125, 192 and 953.

969. सुवेषाढ्या
Suveṣa means beautifully adorned. This is the symbol of Her auspiciousness in terms of nāma-s 51 and 967. The one who is thus adorned is described in the next nāma.

970. सुवासिनी
A woman who is auspiciously dressed and lives with her spouse is called suvāsin. The qualities of a suvāsin are described by Anasūyā in Vālmīki Rāmāayaṇa (ayodhākāṇḍa, Canto 117, verses 22 to 24). “Oh! Proud Sītā! Worlds that are attended with great prosperity await those women to whom their husband is dear, no matter whether he lives in a city or a forest, whether he is propitious or adverse. In the eyes of women who are blessed with a noble disposition, the husband is the highest deity, no matter whether he is ill-mannered or licentious or entirely devoid of riches. Though deeply pondering, I do not see for a woman, a friend greater than her husband and more capable of yielding one’s desired object at all places like the imperishable fruit of one’s austerities.” Again in Canto 39 verse 22 says (Rāma’s mother Kausalyā speaks to Sītā thus) “Neither noble birth nor good turn, nor learning, nor gift nor even marriage ties capture the heart of such women, who are in fact devoted to good conduct, truthfulness and the percept of their elders and keep within the bounds of decorum laid down for their family, their husband is the most sacred object and he alone excels all.” Yet again Sītā says (Sundarakāṇḍa – canto 24 – verse 9), “I am devoted to my husband, Śrī Rāma, the foremost of the Ikṣvākus, in the same way as the highly blessed śacī waits upon Indra, as does Arundhatī upon sage Vasiṣṭha and Rohiṇī (the foremost of the twenty seven spouses of the Moon god, presiding over the same number constellations appearing in the sky) on the Moon god, as does, Lopāmudrā upon sage Agastya and Sukanyā did upon sage Cyavana, as Sāvitrī did upon Satyavān and Śrīmatī upon Lord Kapila, as Madayantī did upon King Saudāsa and Keśinī upon King Sagara, and as Damayantī, daughter of Bhīma, was devoted to her husband, Nala.” Based on the above references in Rāmāayaṇa, suvāsini not merely means the one who is well dressed, but also endowed with good qualities. Since Lalitāmbikā is not only auspiciously and graciously dressed but also is the embodiment of all good qualities, She is addressed as suvāsini by Vāc Devi-s.

971. सुवासिन्यर्चनप्रीता
She is pleased when She is worshipped by suvāsini-s discussed in the previous nāma. Such suvāsini-s are highly revered and worshipped at the end of navāvaraṇa pūja.

972. आशोभना
The alphabet Ā strengthens the word śobhana. Śobhana means beautiful and āśobhana means extremely beautiful. Saundarya Laharī consists of two parts, Ānanda Lahari (1 to 41) and Saundarya Laharī (42 to 100). The first forty one verses talk about bliss and the next fifty nine verses talk about Her beauty.

973. शुद्धमानसा
She is pure minded. If the mind is associated with senses, it becomes impure. She can be realised only in the purest form of consciousness, a product of mind, where the mind becomes focused on Her alone, devoid of other thoughts. This is achieved through meditation. She is not affected by karma-s and impressions (vāsana), hence She is pure minded. Such descriptions are based on the fact that the Brahman is omnipresence and the great saying “I am That”. When one considers himself as That (the Brahman), he should be aware of the qualities of the Brahman. This nāma says that purity of mind is one of the essential qualities of the Brahman. Such descriptions make a practitioner to understand the qualities of the Brahman, so that he can practice and implement them in order to become Brahman himself (realising the Brahman).

974. बिन्दुतर्पणसन्तुष्टा
She is happy if offerings are made in the bindu. Bindu has already been discussed in nāma 905 baindavāsanā. The central point of Śrī Cakra is called bindu. It is placed in the midst of the inner most (top most in the case of Meru) triangle, that is discussed in nāma 976. Bindu is called sarvānanda maya cakra, also known as baindava sthāna. She is worshipped here with viśeṣa argya and flowers. Preparation and offering of viśeṣa argya is one of the important rituals of Śrī Cakra navāvaraṇa pūja. Offering viśeṣa argya on the bindu is called tarpaṇa. Sudha Devi is invoked in the vessel containing viśeṣa argya. This is an elaborate procedure involving a lot of rituals and mantra-s. Viśeṣa argya should be prepared purely according to the instructions of one’s guru. Left hand worshippers add wine and other intoxicating materials to viśeṣa argya.

975. पूर्वजा
She exists even before creation. It is said that Śiva created Her and She created the universe. Brahman is the eternal reality. Māyā or illusion may be described as something that has the appearance of a transient reality. Brahman has no name and form, bur Māyā is full of names and forms and projected as the blunder of illusory phenomenal existence. Māyā is the creation of the Brahman. This reasons out this nāma. This nāma can also be explained in terms of nāma 397.

976. त्रिपुराम्बिका
Tripurāmbikā is the presiding deity of eighth āvaraṇa or covering of Śrī Cakra. This āvaraṇa is the innermost triangle of Śrī Cakra in the midst of which is the bindu, the central point of Śrī Cakra, is placed. It can also be construed that towards the end of this Sahasranāma, the goddess of the eighth āvaraṇa is worshipped by Vāc Devi-s. This triangle forms Her subtler form kāmakalā. Tripurāmbikā means mother of triads. Triad refers to creation, sustenance and mahat (the great principle, the buddhi, Intellect, or the intellectual principle (according to the Sāṃkhya philosophy the second of the twenty three principles produced from prakṛiti and so called as the great source of ahaṃkāra (ego), self-consciousness, and manas, the mind). The three lines of this triangle represent all that is in the form of triads (for example creation, sustenance and dissolution; sleep, dream and deep sleep stages, etc) Each corner of this triangle is guarded by Vāmā, Vajreśvarī and Bhagamālinī, the three important Devi-s of Śrī Cakra. Vāmākeśvara tantra (IV.9, 10) says “She is vāmā, śikhā, jyeṣṭā, the maker of triangles. As Raudri She swallows the universe. She is the ultimate unified Śaktī, the Parameśvarī, Tripura, the very self of Brahma, Viṣṇu and Īśa.” In the ninth āvaraṇa, She is worshipped as the sum total of all the triads as Lalitāmbikā. All the triads unite into a single bindu in the ninth āvaraṇa. Sat, cit and ānanda, all the three unite at the bindu to become the Supreme Brahman where She shines eternally as the nirguṇa Brahman.

977. दशमुद्रासमाराध्या
She is worshipped through ten types of finger gestures known as mudra-s. Samārādhana means worship. Mudra-s are the configuration of fingers that represent the energy of the deity concerned. They are the secret signs of exchange between the practitioner and the deity and should never be used in public. Mudra-s are highly powerful. It is said that if one meditates on the radiance of the sun and of the moon and chants mantra-s, he is empowered by the triple mystery, then the rays of the universal will shine forth and all obstacles of ignorance will instantly dissolve in the ocean of mind. Āgama śāstra can be broadly classified under three paths, vāma marga, tantra marga and kaula marga. They advocate three types of sacrifices, rites, worship and knowledge. There is another way of worship known as pañcaṅga, which consists of nyāsa (attribution of mantra-s in different parts of the body with fingers in order to sanctify the body), mudra, japa, pūja and worship of other gods and goddesses (such as Varuṇa for sanctifying the vessels, etc used in the rites). Mudra-s are also used to accomplish the mystical powers of various bīja-s. Mudra-s represent the union of Śiva and Śaktī (left hand is Śaktī and right hand is Śiva) and the potential auspicious energy arising out of their union. Daśamudra-s or ten mudra-s are used in Śrī vidyā, the worship of the Divine Mother. Śrī Cakra has nine coverings or āvaraṇa-s and each of them is ruled by a Śaktī. Each of these Śaktī-s has a mudra and this accounts for nine mudra-s. In the ninth āvaraṇa Lalitāmbikā is worshipped with yoni mudra. Apart from worshipping the presiding deities of each āvaraṇa-s with the respective mudra-s, Lalitāmbikā is also worshipped with yoni mudra in all the āvaraṇa-s. Those who are initiated into ṣodaśī mantra worship Her with sarva trikhaṇḍā mudra (nāma 983). Trikhaṇḍā mudra means the union of various triads into single entity. For example, practitioner, his Guru and Devi or the knower, the known and the path of knowing, etc. This fact is highlighted in nāma 254. Trikhaṇḍā mudra is used to invoke the Goddess during rituals. At the time of offering these mudra-s, the respective mantra-s along with the respective bīja-s should also be recited mentally.

978. त्रिपुराश्रीवशङ्करी
Tripurāśrī is the name of the presiding deity of the fifth āvaraṇa of Śrī Cakra. This āvaraṇa is known as the accomplisher of all objects (sarvārtha-sādhakā). This āvaraṇa further strengthens the bondage between the guru and his disciple. While worshipping this cakra, the names and forms of various objects merge into Ātma (soul), an important stage in the path of Self-realisation. Ten śaktī-s are worshipped in the āvaraṇa-s indicating the ten incarnations of Lord Viṣṇu, who is the authority for sustaining the universe in the best possible auspicious way. Śrī Cakra has nine āvaraṇa-s and each āvaraṇa is presided by a deity. All their names have been mentioned in this Sahasranāma as various nāma-s, either directly or indirectly. In the ascending order they are nāma-s 626, 787, 997, 970, 978, 455, 471, 976 and 234. This nāma means that Tripurāśrī is a part of Lalitāmbikā. Alternatively, it can also be said that Vāc Devi-s pay obeisance to Tripurāśrī, the deity known for supreme knowledge before revealing Lalitāmbikā in the last nāma. The unique feature of this Sahasranāma is that it makes the devotee exited when he progresses towards the last nāma, where Lalitāmbikā is fully revealed. The revelation comes about only when one understands the meaning of each nāma.

979. ज्ञानमुद्रा
This is also known as cin mudra. This mudra is made by connecting the tip of the index finger with the tip of the thumb, by keeping other fingers stretched. This gesture indicates the union of jīvātma with Paramātma (union of soul with the Brahman). This mudra is called jñānamudra, as knowledge means the realisation of oneness of jīvātma and paramātma. Lord Dakṣiṇāmūrti (incarnation of Śiva. Also refer nāma 725) used cin mudra to initiate His young disciples Sanaka (refer nāma 726) and others (the psychical sons of Brahma). This nāma calls Her as jñānamudra as She is the symbol of knowledge. It can also be said that She is the passport (mudra also means passport) to knowledge (jñāna). Mud means bliss and ra means gives and in this context, the nāma means that through knowledge She offers bliss to Her devotees.

980. ज्ञानगम्या
Gamya means approachable. She is approachable only through knowledge or She is perceived only through knowledge. She can be attained through three means, either through bhāvana or meditation (nāma 113), second through bhakti or devotion (nāma 119) or though jñāna or knowledge (the present nāma). Ultimately, meditation and devotion merge into knowledge where Selfrealisation takes place. Following quotes of Kṛṣṇa confirm the above interpretation. “Sacrifice through knowledge is superior to sacrifice performed with material offerings. For all actions without exception culminate in knowledge” (Bhagavad Gīta IV.33). “On those ever united through devotion, with me and worship me with love, I confer that yoga of wisdom through which they come to me. In order to shower my grace on them I dwell in their heart and dispel the darkness born out of ignorance by shining the light of wisdom” (Bhagavad Gīta X.10, 11). {Further reading: What is wisdom? Is it all knowingness? Patañjali in his yoga sūtra (I.25) says “In Him becomes infinite that allknowingness which in others is only a germ”. Let us assume that someone steals money from somebody, thinking that his action of theft is not known to anybody. But it will be known to a Self- realised person, because his knowledge is not individualised but connected to cosmos. The sum total of individual knowledge is known as universal knowledge. All-knowingness is the very element of consciousness; where there is consciousness, there exists knowing. If consciousness is pervasive, then it is all-knowing. Knowledge is nothing but manifestation of consciousness through an appropriate mental mode. Vivekacūḍāmaṇi (408 - 410) says “The wise one realises in his heart the infinite Brahman, which is an ineffable something, of the nature of eternal knowledge and absolute bliss, who has no exemplar, which transcends all limitations, is ever free and without activity, which is like the limitless sky, indivisible and absolute. The wise one realises in his heart in Samādi, the infinite Brahman, which is devoid of the touch of cause and effect, which is the Reality beyond all imagination, which is homogeneous, matchless, beyond the reach of logical proofs, but proved by the experience of the wise and ever familiar to man as the basis of his Self-awareness. The wise one realises in his heart, in Samādi, the infinite Brahman, which is imperishable and immortal, the Reality which is the negation of all negations, which resembles the ocean when the waves have subsided, which is without a name, in which have subsided all the modification of the guṇa-s and which is eternal, pacified and ONE.”}

981. ज्ञानज्ञेयस्वरूपिणी
The importance of knowledge is being repeatedly stressed by Vāc Devi-s towards the end of this Sahasranāma. This nāma says She is the knowledge and the knowing. The previous nāma said that She can be approached only through knowledge. Nāma 979 said that She is the symbol of knowledge. Kṛṣṇa explains this in Bhagavad Gīta (XIII.17) “The Supreme Brahman is said to be the light of all lights, and entirely beyond māyā and is knowledge itself, worth attaining through real wisdom and is particularly seated in the heart of all.” Jñāna means knowledge, the essential nature of the Brahman. Jñeya is a qualifying word here, with intent to reveal that the primary duty of a man is to know Her. It means ‘to be learnt or understood or ascertained or investigated or perceived or inquired about’. She can be known only through knowledge as said in nāma 980. Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (I.12) says, “You have to know that Brahman is always residing within. There is nothing higher than this knowledge. The jīva (the enjoyer), the jagat (that which the enjoyer enjoys) and the Brahman within, who directs – know these three as the Brahman.”

982. योनिमुद्रा
Yoni-mudra is the ninth mudra of ten mudra-s discussed in nāma 977. Yoni is the typical symbol of the divine procreative energy. Worshipping Her through yoni mudra means seeking Her authorisation to the divine procreative energy. Procreation here means the transformation of the practitioner after understanding the significations of the nāma-s so far discussed, and in particular, nāmas 978 onwards (attaining knowledge). Kṛṣṇa says in Bhagavad Gīta (XIV.3) “mama yoni mahad brahmā मम योनन महद् ब्रह्मा” which means ‘my primordial nature known as the great Brahma is the yoni of all creatures. Yoni is the name attributed to prakṛti, as prakṛti is the material cause of creation. Śiva says to Pārvatī (Todala tantra II.25) “My dear, this yoni mudra removes all illness. Oh! Goddess, without elaborating I can just say that it destroys great diseases and Oh! Goddess, without exaggerating I can say that this mudra causes the realisation of the mantra, brings about direct perception of one ’s self and bestows on the practitioner the great liberation.” Yoni mudra is the secret communication between the practitioner and the Divine Mother where the former seeks to access knowledge and consequent liberation. Yoni mudra should never be used publicly. There are three types of yoni mudra-s. The first one is used during navāvaraṇa pūja. The second one is used during preliminary meditative practices. Five fingers of both the hands are used to plug the sensory organs in the head to listen to the subtle sound within. The third is a tougher one with the combination of breath control, posture and mantra and more to do with the movement of kuṇḍalinī. This nāma says that She is in the form of yoni mudra.

983. त्रिखण्डेशी
Trikhanṇḍa is the tenth mudra. This mudra is used to invoke Her during rituals. Trikhanṇḍa mudra also means the union of various triads into single entity. For example, practitioner, his Guru and Devi or the knower, the known and the path of knowing are triads. Merger of triads into a single entity is the supreme knowledge that the practitioner has asked for in the previous nāma using yoni mudra. It is also said that this mudra refers to the three kūṭa-s of Pañcadaśī mantra. From the broader perspective, this mudra can be termed as the Brahma mudra. The extended pair of fingers point out to creation, sustenance and dissolution.

984. त्रिगुणा
She is in the form of three guṇa-s or qualities viz sattvic, rajas and tamas. Sattva guṇa means the quality of purity and knowledge. The presence of other two guṇa-s is not very prominent in sattva guṇa as this guṇa is endowed with the highest purity. Rajo guṇa is the activity of passion. Tamo guṇa is inertia or ignorance. These two guṇa-s have higher trace of other guṇa-s. Guṇa-s are the inherent qualities of prakṛti. Ego and intellect originate from guṇas that are present in all the evolutes of prakṛti at once, but distributed in unequal proportions in each individual. The predominant guṇa that prevails in an individual is reflected through his thoughts and actions. Kṛṣṇa explains guṇa-s in Bhagavad Gīta (IV.6 - 9) “Sattva, rajas and tamas - these three qualities born of prakṛti (Nature) tie down the imperishable soul to the body. Of these, sattva being immaculate, is illuminating and flawless; it binds through identification with joy and wisdom. The quality of rajas, with is of the nature of passion, as born of avariciousness and attachment. It binds the soul through attachment to actions and their fruits. Tamas, the deluder of all those who look upon the body as their own self, are born of ignorance. It binds the soul through error, sloth and sleep. Sattva drives one to joy, and rajas to action, while tamas clouding the wisdom incites one to err as well as sleep and sloth.” Chapter of Bhagavad Gīta XIV extensively deals with guṇa-s. Kṛṣṇa again says (Bhagavad Gīta XIV.20) “Having transcended the aforesaid guṇa-s, which have caused the body, and freed from birth, death, old age and all kinds of sorrow, this soul attains the supreme bliss.” Nāma 139 nir-guṇa said that She is devoid of guṇa-s and this nāma says that She is the embodiment of guṇa-s. This is not a contradiction. Nāma 139 refers to Her nirguṇa Brahman (without attributes) status and this nāma refers to Her saguṇa Brahman (with attributes) status. Please also refer nāma 397 mūla-prakṛti. This nāma says that the three guṇa-s arise from Her. Creation cannot happen without guṇa-s. From this point of view, this nāma confirms Her Śrī Mātā status.

985. अम्बा
This is an interjectory statement. The practitioner gets excited here and reaches a stage that is very close to ecstasy. Ambā means mother. It can be said that Vāc Devi-s while narrating Her various forms and qualities, overwhelmed with emotions, called Her as Ambā. This can be experienced, while reciting this Sahasranāma with intent devotion. There is a very rarely used term called guṇa-dharma, the linguistic representation of the Brahman. Guṇa-dharma means the mental and linguistic attribution, whose ontological content, however is nothing but the one undivided reality of the Brahman expressible by various attributions. Since She is the cause of such attributions in terms of the previous nāma, She is addressed as Ambā.

986. त्रिकोणगा
Trikoṇā means triangle and this nāma says that She resides in a triangle. Triangle here means the innermost triangle of Śrī Cakra, known as sarva-siddhi-pradā cakra. While performing Śrī Cakra pūja, this triangle should be facing the performer. This is the eighth āvaraṇa or covering of Śrī Cakra. This triangle and the bindu within, indicate creation. The triangle represents Śaktī and the bindu represents Śiva. This triangle is the creation of Śiva. This confirms the theory that Śiva is the creator of Śaktī. The bindu is also known as parā, the bindu tattva. The bindu exhibits a series of throbs known as spanda or divine pulsation, also known as the creative pulsation of Śiva. These divine pulsations manifest as a triangle. The triangle represents all the triads like icchā, jñāna and kriyā śaktī-s or three guṇa-s, or paśyantī, madhyamā and vaikharī, or creation, sustenance and dissolution, etc. It is said that the ‘three purā-s of bindu (representing the three sides of the triangle) wherein abides the impenetrable transcendent greatness of all devata-s. Devata-s mean the different energies that are required to keep the universe afloat. The inner most triangle gives rise to all other triangles of Śrī Cakra. It is to be observed that the bindu is the cause of only the innermost triangle and other triangles emerge from the inner most triangle. This is in confirmation of the theory that Śiva created Śaktī alone and the rest of the creation was made only by Śaktī. Śrī Cakra is nothing but a graphical expression of the theory of creation. Pure knowledge is also known as trikona. The three corners of the triangle refer to three types of manifestations, the experiment, the experience and the object of experience (nāma 254). The triangle and the bindu represent Liṅga form of Śiva. Liṅga Purāṇa (II.47.9) says ‘The pedestal of Liṅga is Goddess Umā and the Liṅga is Maheśvara Himself. By worshipping these two, the Lord and Goddess are worshipped.’ When She embraces Śiva in Her subtlest form kuṇḍalinī, She is impregnated to manifest in the form of icchā (will), jñāna (cognition) and kriyā (action) śaktī-s disturbing the equal proportion of guṇa-s, thereby causing the creation. The entire universe arises from this triangle, the cause of which is the bindu within. She is extremely happy when Her consort is worshipped (nāma 974 bindu-trarpaṇa-santuṣṭā). After all, She is Śiva-priyā (nāma 409) and Śiva-parā (nāma 410). Based on the above reasons, it has been repeatedly said that Śrī Cakra worship should be done in strict privacy. Bhāvanopaniṣad describes procedures that are to be performed through mentation (the root word of meditation). Kṛṣṇa also advocates mental worship. He says in Bhagavad Gīta (VI.25) “He should through gradual practice attain tranquillity and fixing on the Brahman through reason controlled by steadfastness, he should not think of anything else. This triangle is called Brahma Yoni by Kṛṣṇa. He says (Bhagavad Gīta XIV.3) mama yonirmahad brahmā which means that the Brahman, the total material substance is the source of birth, making possible the birth of all other creatures. In the next verse He says “Prakṛti or Nature is the conceiving mother, while I am the seedgiving father.” This is a typical example of the inner most triangle and bindu of Śrī Cakra.

987. अनघा
Agha means sin, impurity, suffering etc. This nāma says that She is devoid of these qualities. This nāma says that in spite of looking after the three exclusive qualities of the Brahman, She continues to be pure. She is an extension of Śiva, who remains eternally pure.

988. अद्भुतचारित्रा
Adbhuta means extraordinary supernatural, wonderful, marvellous and cāritra means conduct, behaviour, manner of acting, etc. The previous nāma negated certain qualities and this nāma affirms certain qualities. Both these nāma-s describe Her saguṇa Brahman form. This nāma says that Her behaviour is supernatural and wonderful. Cāritra also means chastity or purity of life of a woman. In this context, this means that She has a stupendous purity. This interpretation aligns well with regard to the placement of this nāma.

989. वाञ्छितार्थप्रदायिनी
She gives, whatever is prayed for by Her devotees. This quality has been already discussed in nāma-s 63 and 567. In Lalitā Triśatī there are three nāma-s-, 43, 144 and 260 conveying the same meaning. Saundarya Laharī (verse 4) explains this quality. It says. “You are the refuge of all the worlds. All gods except you protect their devotees and grant their desires by gestures of their hands. You do not offer them by hands as your feet are powerful to protect those in the grip of fear and grant more than what is desired for, by the devotees. This verse subtly conveys Bālā mantra: aiṁ - klīṁ - sauḥ ऐीं-कलरीं-सौः. Kānci Paramācārya says, “It is difficult to train the mind to the practice of meditating on a form or repeat a mantra. But, the first step has to be taken. It is only when it is pleasing to our mind that we will take the first step. In the spiritual path there is a first step which is pleasing. That is Ambikai’s feet. Without any difficulty, any one can start meditating on Devi’s lotus feet. If we think of the beauty and coolness of that Lotus Feet, the mind will get used to remain steady in that. If we worship like this always, by Her grace, there will be end to birth. Or, one can first read the stuti-s (stotra-s) which speak of Her greatness. The first step is reading; then japa; then meditation. When meditating like that we should pray ‘Parāśaktī! Bless me, so that when life leaves this body, I should be meditating on you and join you on again.’ If, everyday, we pray like this at Her lotus feet, even at the moment when life goes out of the body, meditation on Her will be there by Her grace. After this body goes, we can merge with Her totally, be freed from the cycles of birth and death and can become bliss ourselves.” (Voice of God – Volume I)

990. अभ्यासातिशयज्ञाता
Abhyās means to concentrate one’s attention upon, to cause, to practice, etc. Atiśaya means pre-eminent, superior, abundant, etc and jñāta means to know or to comprehend. This nāma says that one should practice continuously to focus his entire attention to know Her supreme qualities. The importance of the mind is emphasised here to know Her. Vāc Devi-s subtly convey the supremacy of mental worship known as meditation. Brahma Sūtra (IV.i.1) says, “Repetition is necessary, since Upaniṣads instruct repeatedly.” It is explained that such repeated instructions as should be heard of, reflected on, and meditated upon. The repeated instructions of the Upaniṣads is “I am the Brahman” or “I am That” or such mahā vācaka-s or the great sayings. Kṛṣṇa also highlights the importance of mediation In Bhagavad Gīta (IX.22). He says “Those who meditate on me as their very own (I am the Brahman), ever united to me by incessant worship, I bring full security and personally attend to their needs.” It is said that She is to be ‘seen’ by perpetual meditation. By constant practice of meditation, She becomes manifested through the union of self with the Self. Having discussed Her gross, subtler and subtlest forms, Vāc Devi-s now directly advise Her devotees to practice meditation to be with Her always.

991. षडध्वातीतरूपिणी
ṣaḍadhva means six types of paths (adhvan – means, methods, paths) of worshipping Her and atīta means transcending. She transcends six methods of worship. Six types of worship are pāda (a verse or a line), bhuvana (abode, referring to Śrī Cakra), varṇa (varṇa means outward appearance, exterior, form, figure, shape and this means idol worship. varṇa also means alphabets. She is mātṛkā varṇa rūpiṇī – nāma 577), tattva (principles as per śivāgama), kalā (sixty four types of tantra-s. Kalā also means time) and mantra (combination of alphabets). Out of the six, pāda, varṇa and mantra are the manifestations of sound or in the form of vāc. This is known as vimarśa form. The other three, bhuvana (earth), tattva and kalā are the manifestations of artha which means cause or reasoning. This is also known as prakāśa form. The universe is created when prakāśa form of Śiva, the eternal Self-illumination, without which no object can be seen, unites with vimarśa form of Śaktī (the power of autonomy given by Śiva to Śaktī, also known as the svabhāva (natural disposition of Śiva). This way, the nāma says that She is beyond all these and in order to attain Her, one has to meditate on Śrī Cakra using these six methods. The practitioner first attains siddhi in mantra-s and he gradually learns to transcend worlds, principles and time (bhuvana, tattva and kalā) to finally realise Her. Please refer nāma 907 for additional information. This nāma begins the narration of Śiva-Śaktī union that culminates in nāma 999.

992. अव्याजकरुणामूर्तिः
She is compassionate without partiality. Avyāja means not pretending. This means that She is not pretentious to be compassionate, but truly compassionate. This nāma subtly condemns pretentiousness. The prime quality of Lalitāmbikā is compassion and this has been discussed in nāma-s 197, 326 and 581. Compassion is the quality of a mother and She being the Supreme Mother, She is said to be the embodiment of compassion in these three nāma-s. Śiva is a disciplinarian (Yajur Veda IV.v.3.1 – Śrī Rudraṁ says, nivyādhina āvyādhinīnām patayae nāmaḥ, which means one who causes pains repeatedly to foes) and Śaktī is compassionate. Saundarya Laharī (verse 6) says that Her eyes are compassionate.

993. अज्ञानध्वान्तदीपिका
She is the lamp that dispels the darkness of ignorance. The lamp here means the source of knowledge. She radiates the self illumination of Śiva as She is the svātantraya śaktī (the absolute autonomy known as vimarśa) of Śiva and brings about the world process. As a matter of fact, the light of wisdom dispels the darkness of ignorance and brings about Self-realisation at the same time. If however, some sequence is maintained between the two processes, it should be understood that the removal of ignorance takes place earlier and is immediately followed by Realisation. Kṛṣṇa explains this lamp in Bhagavad Gīta (X.11), “In order to shower my grace on them, I, dwelling in their heart, dispel the darkness born of ignorance by the shining light freedom.” {Further reading on ajñāna: ajñāna means ignorance, particularly spiritual ignorance which is illusory, beginningless and removed by knowledge, neither real nor unreal. It is something positive. If it is not positive, it cannot be the material cause of the world. It is composed of three guṇa-s. Being positive, it is the cause of illusion. Ignorance is considered as not real, since it disappears at the dawn of knowledge. It is not unreal, since it is an object of experience. As it is neither real nor unreal, it is called indescribable. Super imposition is the effect of ajñāna. The world is superimposed on the Brahman and this is due to ignorance. It disappears with the knowledge of ultimate Reality. Bondage also is illusory and removed by knowledge but not removed immediately by knowledge, i.e. bondage is due to ignorance and ignorance is immediately dispelled by knowledge, so bondage is ultimately removed by knowledge. Although the desire of knowledge and prior non-existence of knowledge are immediately removed with the attainment of knowledge, they are not illusory. Hence it is sure that the definition of ignorance is not too wide, since it is not applicable to the bondage, desire and prior non-existence. Consciousness can never be illusory, as illusion is always negated.}

994. आबालगोपविदिता
Ābālam means including children, gopa means cowherds (gopa also means a protector or a female guardian) and vidita means known, understood, perceived, etc. She is perceived or understood even by children and cowherds, who do not have spiritual knowledge. The word ‘cowherd’ is used in a broader sense to refer those who totally concentrate in the jobs they do, without trying to know the Brahman or do not have time to know the Brahman. In a way they are karmayogi-s and are highly appreciated by Kṛṣṇa. Karma yogi can also attain Her, but pursuing Brahman through the path of karma takes more time than pursuing the Brahman through knowledge. It is also said by the usage of bāla-gopa, it could mean to refer either Sadāśiva or Kṛṣṇa. Then the nāma means that She is perceived by the highest level of divinity to the lowest level of human existence, children. Śrī Rudraṁ (I.8) says, utainam gopā adṛśan adṛśan udahāryaḥ which means ‘keepers of cows and bearers of water have seen Him.’

995. सर्वानुल्लङ्घ्यशासना
Her commands are never disobeyed. Even if one realises Her, he too cannot disobey Her commands. Even Brahma, Viṣṇu and Rudra do not disobey Her. This nāma can be read along with nāma 274 pañca-kṛtya-parāyaṇā. Saundarya Laharī (verse 24) says, “Brahma creates the universe. Viṣṇu sustains it and Rudra dissolves it. Annihilating them, Īśvara conceals Himself as well. Sadāśiva approves them, pursuant to your command conveyed through thy creeper (beautifully curved) like eye brows moved but for a moment.” {Further reading on the above verse: Brahma is the creator, Viṣṇu is the sustainer, Rudra is the dissolver, Īśvara is the cause for tirodhāna (concealment), and Sadāśiva is the ultimate in whom all the other four commingle. (Sadāśiva is explained as the stage where the experience of “I” is more pronounced than the existence itself. Icchā śakti is predominant in this tattva). This happens during annihilation or the great deluge Śaktī is eternal with Sadāśiva, who is also known as Śiva. Apart from the four stages, there is yet another stage called as re-creation. During the process of recreation, Īśvara originates from Sadāśiva and from Īśvara originates Rudra, from Rudra originates Viṣṇu, from Viṣṇu originates Brahma and Brahma starts creation to get annihilated again.}

996. श्रीचक्रराजनिलया
She abides in Śrī Cakra. This is also known as Śrī Yantra and Cakra-rājā. This is the supreme amongst all the yantra-s. Uttara bhāg (the chapter containing the benefits of recitation, also known as phalaśruti) of Lalitā Triśatī elucidates Śrī Cakra in a comprehensive manner. Śrī Cakra is the body of Śiva and Śaktī. Śrī Cakra is compared to a human body and Śiva and Śaktī are compared to the soul within. Śrī Cakra is full of life and energy and should be worshipped with great reverence. Any god or goddess can be worshipped in Śrī Cakra as all of them have a place in it. Saundarya Laharī (verse 11) describes Śrī Cakra. “Your abode (Śrī Cakra) is made up of nine mūlaprakṛti-s, the primary causative force of the universe, represented by the triangles in Śrī Cakra. There are four Śiva triangles, the apex of which facing upwards and five Śaktī triangles the apex of which facing downwards, the bindu, eight petal lotus, the sixteen petal lotus and three circles with four entries thus counting forty four.” In all Śrī Cakra has forty three triangles and the bindu. Apart from the triangles, there is an eight petal lotus and a sixteen petal lotus. All the forty three triangles and the bindu are within the two lotuses. Outside these two lotuses, there are three circular lines. Outside these circular lines there are three squares with four entries from each side. This is the formation of Śrī Cakra. One has to enter the Śrī Cakra from the outermost square. All the three squares put together is known as trailokaya-mohana that deludes the three stages of consciousness. This is the first enclosure of Śrī Cakra. This enclosure is ruled by Tripurā Devi. Each āvaraṇa, known as enclosure is ruled by a presiding deity and has an independent yogini. Yogini of the first āvaraṇa is known as prakaṭa yogini. In the outermost walls there are ten goddesses representing ten siddhi-s (super human powers), in the middle wall, there are aṣṭa māta-s (eight devi-s like Brāhmī, Vārāhi, etc). Their spouses are the aṣṭa Bhairava-s (Asitāñga, Ruru, etc). In the inner wall there are ten goddesses representing the ten mudra-s (hand gestures) like, yoni mudra (nāma 982), trikhaṇḍā (nāma 983), etc. Therefore, in the first enclosure there are 10 + 8 + 10 = 28 goddesses. Entry into Śrī Cakra is to be made from the opening just below the apex of the innermost triangle, facing the worshipper. After worshipping all the twenty eight goddesses and after obtaining permission from them, one has to move to the next enclosure. The second enclosure is known as sarvāśa-pari-pūraka that enlivens the spiritual hopes of the practitioner. This enclosure is ruled by Tripureśī and the yogini for this enclosure is Gupta yogini. The second enclosure is the sixteen petal lotus inside the three circles and no worship takes place in the three circles. Each of the sixteen petals is ruled by a goddess and each petal has one vowel of Sanskrit (Sanskrit has sixteen vowels). After worshipping these sixteen goddesses and after obtaining permission from them, one has to proceed to the next enclosure. The third enclosure is known as sarva-saṁkṣobhaṇa that crusades for spiritual aspirations. This is the eight petal lotus. The presiding deity of this enclosure is Tripurasundarī and the yogini is Guptatara yogini. There are eight goddesses in each of the petals. After worshipping them and after obtaining permission from them, one has to enter the first set of triangles of Śrī Cakra. The fourth enclosure is known as sarva-saubhāgya-dāyaka, which provides all spiritual and material comforts. It has fourteen triangles and presided over by Tripuravāsinī. The concerned yogini is Saṁpradāya yogini. Each petal is ruled by a goddess. After worshipping them and after obtaining permission from them, one has to proceed to the next enclosure. The fifth enclosure is known as sarvārtha-sādhaka, which makes the worshipper spiritually prosper and has ten triangles. The presiding deity is Tripurāśrī and the concerned yogini is kulottīrṇayogini. Each triangle is presided over by a goddess. After worshipping them and after obtaining permission from them one has to proceed to the next covering. The sixth āvaraṇa has again ten triangles and is known as sarvarakṣākara cakra, which protects the worshipper from the inflictions of saṃsāra. This enclosure is known as inner ten triangles and the previous triangle is known as exterior ten triangles. This āvaraṇa is presided over by Tripuramālinī and the yogini is Nigarbha Yogini. Each of the triangles is presided over by a goddess. After worshipping them and after their permission, one has to proceed to the next enclosure. The seventh āvaraṇa is sarva-roga-hara cakra the remover of all mental afflictions. It has eight triangles also known as vasu koṇa representing the eight vasu-s (according to Bṛhadāraṇayaka Upaniṣad (III.ix.) aṣṭa vasu-s or eight Vasu-s are Āpa, the water; Dhruva, the pole-star; Soma, the Moon; Dhava or Dhara; Anila, the Wind; Anala or Pāvaka, the fire; Pratyusha, the dawn; and Prabhāsa, the light). The presiding deity is Tripurāsiddhā and the yogini is Rahasya yogini. Each of the triangles is presided over by a Vāc Devi, the authors of this Sahasranāma. Vāmakeśvarīmatam (verses 60-63) says that all the Sanskrit alphabets are ruled by these eight Vāc Devi-s. Apart from what is said in the above scripture, all the triangles and lotus petals are inscribed with Sanskrit alphabets. This triangle is just outside the inner most triangle (nāma 986). After worshipping these eight goddesses, one proceeds to worship the armouries of Lalitāmbikā. The eighth enclosure is just outside the central bindu which is the innermost triangle. This is where the spiritual attainments begin and culminate at the bindu within. Outside this triangle, the weaponries of Lalitāmbikā are placed. The weapons are described in nāma-s 8, 9, 10 and 11. After worshipping Her weaponries, one enters the eighth enclosure, known as sarva siddhi pradhā and is ruled by Tripurāmbā and the concerned yogini is Atirahasya yogini. There are three goddesses who are worshipped at the three corners of the triangle and Lalitāmbikā is worshipped at the central point, the bindu. Outside this inner most triangle the fifteen tithi nitya devi-s are worshipped. Each tithi represents one lunar day. One’s guru lineage is also worshipped in three parallel lines drawn outside the upper portion of the inner most triangle. In this place, one’s guru, guru’s guru and guru’s guru’s guru are worshipped. Along with them several celebrated gurus are also worshipped. Worshipping guru is an important aspect of Śrī vidyā cult. The ninth enclosure is the bindu. This is known as ‘sarvānandamaya cakra’, the ultimate bliss, where self unites with ever existing and omnipresent Self (the Brahman) here. This is presided by Śrī Mahā Tripurasundarī also known through various other names such as Lalitāmbikā, Rājarājeśvarī, Mahā Kāmeśvarī, etc who is the ultimate Goddess of this universe, the Supreme Mother. The concerned yogini is Parāparāti rahasya yogini (Parāparāti rahasya means the supreme secret). Beyond this point, those who are not initiated into ṣodaśī cannot proceed. Those who are initiated into ṣodaśī are blessed to worship Her again at the bindu with Her ultimate mantra and trikhanda mudra. This cakra or the enclosure or āvaraṇa is the highly secretive in nature, where the conjugation of prakāśa and vimarśa (Śiva and Śaktī) form of creation takes place. Here Śaktī sits on the left lap of Śiva and They together shower Their grace on those who seek Them. When a practitioner is afflicted with worldly ties, known as saṃsāra, enters Śrī Cakra, he is gradually endowed with knowledge and by the time he reaches the supreme bindu, he is totally transformed. The bindu stands for both creation and absorption. A practitioner stands totally absorbed when he enters the bindu from the first āvaraṇa. If an absorbed practitioner again indulges in saṃsāra, he is re-created making his exit from the bindu to the outermost cakra. Totally, one hundred and thirteen goddesses are worshipped in Śrī Cakra. Śrī Cakra is enclosed by Śrī Nagara, where exists twenty five forts. In between the forts there are huge places where all the other gods and goddesses reside. The nine coverings of Śrī Cakra are compared to six psychical cakra-s beginning from mūlādhāra to ājñā, sahasrāra, kula sahasrāra and akula sahasrāra. Śrī Cakra is not a mere geometrical representation of creation, sustenance, dissolution, concealing and re-creation; it is the known expression of evolutionary cosmology which is superimposed on a miniscule existence of a human being. Scriptures point out that human body is just a replica of Śrī Cakra. This nāma says that She resides in this most perplexing Śrī Cakra.

997. श्रीमत्त्रिपुरसुन्दरी
Śiva is known as Tripura. Tri means three and pura means fortress, castle etc. And Tripura means three fortresses. Three fortresses refer to the three unique acts of Śiva, the creation, sustenance and dissolution. Each of these acts is supervised by Brahma, Viṣṇu and Rudra. Since Śiva is the overall controller of all these acts, He is known as Tripura-Sundarā (Sundara is a suffix indicating his handsome appearance). It is said that Brahma, Viṣṇu and Rudra are the parts of Śiva’s body. His consort is known as Tripura Sundarī (Sundarī is the feminine gender of Sundara). This has been explained in nāma 787 Tripureśī. In Vāmakeśvarīmatam (IV.4), Śiva addresses Bhairavi “Dear One! Tripura is the ultimate primordial Śaktī, the light of manifestation. She, as Mātṛkā, through Her gross and subtle aspects give birth to the three worlds. At dissolution, She is the abode of all things (meaning the tattva-s or principles), still remaining Herself (nāma 571). After She emanates, there is no need for the Lord (Śiva). Devoid of Śaktī, He cannot act.” Tripura also means Vāmā, Śikhā and Jyeṣṭā, the three deities presiding over the three lines of the innermost triangle of Śrī Cakra looking after creation, sustenance and dissolution. Each of the lines of this triangle is known as pura or a fort. Since She is the ultimate unified Śaktī controlling the three pura-s, She is known as Tripura. She as the Brahman causes the process of manifestation through the three kūṭa-s of Pañcadaśī mantra referring respectively to icchā śaktī, jñāna śaktī and kriyā śaktī. Hence, She is known as Mahā Tripura Sundari (mahā means supreme). {Further reading: She is Ādi Śaktī from whom all the triads (tripura) are derived. Ādi Śaktī is the sum total of all the energy forms, the cause of material creation. Time to time, this divine energy manifests itself in various forms and shapes that we are able to construe. The entire universe is filled either with matter or with energy. In other words, what we call as void is filled with gravitational force or electromagnetic fields. It has been proved scientifically, that the universe was much smaller that it appears today and will expand further leading to the ultimate collapse known as annihilation. The expansion of the universe stops at some point of time and the universe begins its contraction. When the contraction is complete, the universe reaches its original state of Big Bang. Śaktī as the kinetic energy and as the Supreme administrator causes the conception, expansion and contraction (the three primary acts of Śaktī, each in the form of a pura; hence She is known as Tripura Sundarī). The kinetic energy is derived from the static energy or the original source of the Big Bang known as Śiva.}

998. श्रीशिवा
The Supreme energy of Śiva personified as His wife. Śiva also means liberation. She has been addressed as Śiva in nāma 53. In this nāma Vāc Devi-s have prefixed Śrī to Śivā as they wanted to declare Her most auspicious form to the world. Śrī is the Lakṣmī bīja and the form of Lakṣmī is considered as one of the most auspicious forms. The one who is able to visualise Her as Śrī Śivā is drenched in bliss as he is going to have a view of Śiva-Śaktī (Śiva-Śaktī sāmarasya) combine in the next nāma and to ultimately merge with Her in the last nāma of this Sahasranāma. Realisation can take place only in the advanced stage of bliss. The final phase of the worshipper is being portrayed through this nāma. The merger of the feminine energy known as kuṇḍalinī before its final union (the next nāma) with the masculine principle known as Śiva, indicating the culmination of spiritual practice. 7. Śiva means the purity of the highest order. Māṇḍūkya Upaniṣad says, “prapañcopaśamam śāntam śivam” which means the total cessation of the world as such, the sum total of that is good, one without a second is the Brahman (it means to say that śivam is all that is good). Yajur Veda (IV.v.10) says, yā te rudra śivā tanuḥ śivā viśvāhabheṣajī (Śrī Rudraṁ 10.3) which means ‘that auspicious form of yours, Oh Rudra! Which is auspicious and ever healing.’ Mahānārāyaṇa Upaniṣad (21) also says “May the Supreme, who is the ruler of all knowledge, controller of all created beings, the preserver of the Vedas and the one overlord of Hiraṇyagarbha, be gracious (Śivaḥ) to me.” Vāc Devi-s should have chosen to place this nāma at the end as they would have liked to articulate the enlightened and transformed vision of the mystic for whom Her paradoxical omnipresence has become a perceivable experience. This nāma is the prologue to the next nāma, the most significant one as it discourses the macrocosmic conceptualisation.

999. शिवशक्तैक्यरूपिणी
This is the most revered, admired, perplexed, incomprehensible and secretive form of the Divine Couple, the confluence of Śiva and Śaktī. The universe is created, sustained, dissolved and re-created by them at their will that is indentured by the law of karma. Saundarya Laharī (verse 1) says, “Śiva becomes capable of creating the universe, only when united with Śaktī, otherwise He is incapable of even a stir (known as spanda).” Śiva is also known as Parabrahman and Śaktī as Parāśaktī. Parabrahman is the static energy and is niṣkāma (devoid of desire, disinterested and unselfish) in nature. The nature of Śiva is explained in Māṇḍūkya Upaniṣad (7), which says, “It is neither consciousness of what is happening within nor the consciousness of what is happening externally. It is not conscious of all objects and it is not unconscious either. It is beyond perception of any organ, beyond thought and sound. In it there is only consciousness of the Self and there is a total cessation of the world as such. It is the embodiment of peace and all that is good. It is without a second.” This is the typical explanation of the Brahman that is preternatural and interpenetrating. Śaktī is primordial and latent energy of Śiva that alone manifests as the universe, its sustentation and disintegration and recreation. The consciousness referred by Māṇḍūkya Upaniṣad is nothing but the domain of Śaktī. That is why it is said that Śaktī is the primordial and latent energy of Śiva. She exists along with Śiva and cannot be separated. If Brahman and consciousness are discriminately differentiated out of nescience, the question of creation and existence does not arise. In reality, such differential existence does not prevail. But for easier understanding of the complex issue of creation, Śiva and Śaktī have been perceived as two different aspects of the same entity. One cannot segregate the heat produced by the fire from the fire itself. The heat of the fire is primordially present in the fire. Neither fire, not heat can be of any use unless they subsist together. This is a typical example showcasing Śiva and Śaktī, the one without the other remain only an inert. Śiva is Self-illuminating. Without His existence, the universe will be plunged into darkness. Śiva is present in prakāśa (illuminating) form. Prakāśa can be explained as visible, shining, universally noted, brightness, lustre, splendour, etc. Prakāśa also refers to Śiva and the Brahman. Śaktī is His vimarśa form. Vimarśa can be explained as reasoning, knowledge, consideration, reflecting etc. In spite of Śiva being the grandeur amongst the cognized existences, He cannot realise His own incomparable splendour without something that is able to reflect His grandeur. This is like a human not able to see his own self without an object that is capable of reflecting his image. Śaktī acts like a reflecting mirror where Śiva is able to realise His Reality, like a mirror reflecting the image of a person who stands before it. Pure consciousness is Śiva and realising the pure consciousness is Śaktī. If Śiva is not present, the consciousness itself does not exist. If Śaktī is not present, the presence of consciousness cannot be realised. In the state of prakāśa ‘I’ and ‘This’ stand united and in the vimarśa aspect ‘This’ is separated from ‘I’. Therefore prakāśa aspect is ‘I + This’ and vimarśa aspect is ‘This’ alone. ‘I’ is the origin of the universe and ‘This’ is the expansion of the universe. Śiva is cit and Śaktī is citi. Cit means foundational consciousness and citi means the consciousness that brings about cognitive operations. Śaktī segregates I and This. Without Śaktī this vital segregation cannot take place. Śiva causes the initial pulsation for creation that is carried forward by Śaktī. Śaktī pushes forward the throb created by Śiva through different principles or tattva-s (thirty six) and sustains it through Her māyā or illusion. Māyā is the sole factor that separates a soul from the Brahman. She is the manifested conglutination of Śiva and Śaktī and therefore She is both the seed and the sprout. This also drives home the point that for creation, two objects are required. For example, a soul alone cannot be born on its own. It has to come into contact with prakṛti or Nature in order to manifest. Procreation is not possible without conjoining of masculine and feminine energies. Moving on from the perceptible to subtle, a lot more is said about Their subtle conjugation. They are referred as two bindu-s (dots), white and red, denoting Śiva and Śaktī respectively. These two bindu-s, in mutual conjunction expand and contract. When they expand, the creation takes place by means of vāc (word) and artha (lit. meaning). Vāc means the Śabda Brahman and artha means thirty six tattva-s or principles. These two bindu-s which enter one another are known as Kāma-Kāmeśvarī. Śiva, the Supreme is in the form of the first alphabet of Sanskrit A (अ), is the cause of all sounds of Veda-s. He attains the form of a bindu after having entered His own vimarśa form, Śaktī, in whom the entire universe is dissolved. Like prakāśa form of bindu entering the vimarśa form of bindu, vimarśa form of bindu also enters prakāśa form of bindu, which is already within it. As a result of this conjugation, a third bindu called as miśra bindu is born. Miśra means combined. Now there are three bindu-s, white, red and miśra. These three bindu-s form a triangle, red and miśra are below and the white bindu is placed above them causing a perfect triangle. The miśra bindu has all the tattva-s or principles within itself and is the cause for further creation. This is the innermost triangle of Śrī Cakra. When these three dots are connected, the three connecting lines represent all the triads such as three guṇa-s, three stages of consciousness, icchā, jñāna and kriyā śaktīs, etc. This triangle becomes the cause for creation beginning with Brahma, Viṣṇu, and Rudra. These three dots are also referred as sun (top), moon (right) and fire (left). There is an inverted triangle below the three dots. The three connecting lines of this lower triangle represent three kūṭa-s of Pañcadaśī mantra (nāmā 89). The upper most bindu (of the upper triangle) is the face of Śaktī (the third eye, denoting dissolution, the two lower dots represent Her bosoms (representing nourishment or sustenance) and the inverted triangle below mean Her procreative organ (representing creation). This is known as kāmakalā and is considered as the most secretive principle of Śiva-Śaktī union. The explanation provided in Varivasyā Rahasya, the treatise on Pañcadaśī mantra, corroborates with the explanation offered for Kāma Kalā Vilasa, yet another treatise on Śrī vidyā. Varivasyā Rahasya (verses 69 to 72) says, “Śiva and Śaktī embrace each other. The Brahman (Śiva) with the desire to create glanced on His other half, His consort and assumed the form of a bindu (referring to male procreative fluids), into which Śaktī enters assuming the form of another bindu (representing female procreative fluids). The mixture formed by their aggregation is known as aham or I, the ego.” This is the subtle form of the union of Śiva and Śaktī. One more interpretation is possible for this most secretive nāma of this Sahasranāma. The scene goes like this. Śiva is sitting alone meditating, His usual posture. Śaktī enters the place of Śiva. Śiva wakes up. First, Śaktī sits next to Śiva. Later on She moves to His left lap and finally occupies His entire left side, blessing the universe with their Ardhanārīśvarā form causing creation and sustenance. When Śaktī moves away from Śiva, He starts His cosmic dance, causing annihilation. Śaktī witnesses His cosmic dance (nāma 232 and 571). Saundarya Laharī (verse 34) says, “I consider your pure frame to be Śiva. Hence the relationship of the principal and the accessory exists in common among you both who as transcendent bliss and consciousness are equipoised.” This nāma salutes Her undifferentiated form from Śiva, that is inseparable eternally. Their union is also known as Śiva-Śaktī sāmarasya, the identity of Consciousness, where identical state prevails in which all differentiation has disappeared.

1000. ललिताम्बिका
Śrī Mātā, Thy name is Lalitāmbikā. Her name is disclosed by Vāc Devi-s only in the last nāma. All along She was known to us as the Supreme Mother who was portrayed through Her gross and subtle qualities. Lalitā means sported, played, playing, wanton, amorous, innocent, soft, gentle, charming, lovely, wished for, desired, quivering. Every one of this meaning perfectly fits Her nature and form. She was described as saguṇa Brahman (Brahman with attributes) and nirguṇa Brahman (Brahman without attributes with eternal purity). Though the Brahman is One, He has been demoed as two, merely to understand Him to the best possible level. If someone claims to know the Brahman thoroughly, he has to be dismissed as the Brahman is beyond comprehension by normal human mind. It is easier to say that the Brahman is without form, but the conceptualisation becomes difficult. In order to understand the Brahman, more has been said about His kinetic aspect rather than the static aspect. This Sahasranāma dwells more on the kinetic aspect of the Brahman rather than the witnessing aspect of the static Brahman, though both happen contemporaneously. The first nāma of this Sahasranāma started with creation by addressing Lalitāmbikā as Śrī Mātā, the next nāma discussed about sustenance and the third nāma subtly conveyed the act of dissolution. Vāc Devi-s conveyed through nāma-s 4 and 5, the other two aspects of the Brahman, annihilation and recreation. Thus in the first five nāma-s, the primary qualities of the Brahman have been explained, though not explicitly. These three acts are again mentioned in nāma-s 264, 266 and 268. Every energy that prevails in this universe has originated from Her and every action that happens in the universe happens because of Her (nāma 895). Even the most revered Veda-s not only originated from Her (nāma 338) but also worship Her (nāma 929). She is the embodiment of compassion (nāma-s 197, 326), yet She cannot be taken for granted. She is also tough at times and punishes the guilty (nāma-s 288, 608, 755). All the letters and their sounds (nāma 640) originate from Her (nāma 577). Hence She is called the embodiment of mantra-s (nāma-s 88, 204, 227, 846). All gods and goddesses worship Her (nāma 83, 629). She can be attained only though pure and unstinted devotional mind (nāma-s 118, 119 and 120). The one without devotion cannot even go anywhere near Her (nāma-s 188 and 189). The very thought of Her brings in auspiciousness (nāma 682). When She is worshipped with purity and dedication, She gives liberation (nāma-s 838, 839). She should be worshipped in private. When one really wants to realise Her, he has to begin with Her ritual worship. He has to then proceed to recitation of Her mantra-s like Pañcadaśī and ṣodaśī. Finally, one has to visualise Her with the help of these one thousand nāma-s. Typically, one method of worship will lead to the next on its own. The mindset of the practitioner is more important than any extraneous considerations. She is subtler (nāma 322) and the subtlest (nāma 110). Her subtle manifestations have more to do with one’s mind rather than involving in laborious rituals. She does not want to look at what one does, but She observes what one thinks. Attaining pure knowledge (nāma 416) is the only way to know Her. All the Upaniṣads repeatedly stress the importance of knowledge to realise the Brahman, as the mind alone is capable of knowing the Brahman. Saundarya Laharī (verse 98) prays, “Oh! Mother! Tell me when shall I, seeking knowledge, drink the water cleansing Your feet.” The unique feature of the Divine Mother is Her holy feet. She wipes out pains and miseries of Her worshippers by Her feet. When She is worshipped through heart and mind, the worshipper is ‘endowed with long life with his association with the soul, and his ignorance cast away, he enjoys the sweetness of what is known as the Supreme Bliss’ (Saundarya Laharī verse 99). Adoring Her in silence within, is the only way to surrender to Her. Too much of speech, too much of thought and too much of action cannot subjugate the mind. When the mind is not subjugated, the senses cannot be controlled. Senses have to be necessarily used for our normal existence, but indulgence makes a person addictive. One has to be in the thick of the world, yet one has to maintain perfect serenity of mind. Any work performed with detachment to the end result of the work, does not cause mental affliction. An obnubilated thought process does not provide a serene environment to transform normal consciousness into pure consciousness, where alone She can be realised. The absolute consciousness which is Self-awareness destroys the ego and bestows liberation. When ‘I’ consciousness vanishes, direct vision of Śrī Mātā, the Creator takes place, bringing in contentment and compassion leading to interminable bliss. This completes the interpretation on Her one thousand auspicious nāma-s that is now placed at Her sanctifying lotus feet praying for all-round happiness and prosperity and peaceful co-existence.
